.. include:: ../common_links.inc

v3.12 (24 Mar 2025)
*******************

This document explains the changes made to Iris for this release
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)


.. dropdown:: v3.12 Release Highlights
   :color: primary
   :icon: info
   :animate: fade-in
   :open:

   The highlights for this minor release of Iris include:

   * Iris now supports Python version 3.13, and has dropped support for Python 3.10,
     as per the Scientific Python
     `SPEC 0 <https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/>`_ schedule.

   * Data is now optional in a cube, which can simplify the regridding process and lays
     the ground work for future features.  See :issue:`4447`.

   * Added :data:`iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS` to capture objects which could not be
     loaded correctly, to assist in fixing loading problems via the Iris API. Several
     loading operations no longer raise their own warnings; instead their loading
     problems are captured in the common object, and a single generic warning is raised.
     See :class:`iris.loading.LoadProblems`.

   * Extended the features of :class:`iris.LoadPolicy` and :data:`iris.LOAD_POLICY`,
     which are now renamed to :class:`iris.CombineOptions` and
     :data:`iris.COMBINE_POLICY` respectively, and gave access to the mechanism in the
     new :func:`iris.util.combine_cubes` utility.

   * Added two new utility functions, :func:`iris.util.combine_cubes` and
     :meth:`iris.util.equalise_cubes`, to assist with merge/concatenate, as well as
     other features to improve loading control.

   Checkout the performance enhancements section for an array of improvements to the
   performance of Iris. Special thanks to the ESMValTool devs for these contributions.

   And finally, get in touch with us on :issue:`GitHub<new/choose>` if you have
   any issues or feature requests for improving Iris. Enjoy!


v3.12.1 (30 Apr 2025)
=====================

.. dropdown:: v3.12.1 Patches
   :color: primary
   :icon: alert
   :animate: fade-in
   :open:

   The patches in this release of Iris include:

   #. Iris no longer supports the ``setup.py develop`` command, due to an
      incompatibility with the latest version of Setuptools.
      ``setup.py`` commands of this sort are deprecated, and the recommended
      replacement for ``develop`` has been ``pip install -e`` for several years
      now. See `Running setuptools commands`_ for more.


v3.12.2 (09 May 2025)
=====================

.. dropdown:: v3.12.2 Patches
   :color: primary
   :icon: alert
   :animate: fade-in

   The patches in this release of Iris include:

   #. Iris is now compatible with Dask versions ``2025.4.0`` and above. We are
      aware that previous incompatibilities had been affecting load and save
      operations for many users.


v3.12.3 (22 Aug 2025)
=====================

.. dropdown:: v3.12.3 Patches
   :color: primary
   :icon: alert
   :animate: fade-in
   :open:

   The patches in this release of Iris include:

   #. Improved compatibility with NumPy >= v1.25 for array comparisons, in
      response to deprecations around un-broadcastable arrays. Delivered in a
      patch release to meet a time-critical need for a specific user.
      :ref:`See the full entry for more<3_12_3_array_comparison>`.


📢 Announcements
================

#. N/A


✨ Features
===========

#. `@pp-mo`_ renamed the :class:`iris.LoadPolicy` as :class:`iris.CombineOptions` and
   :data:`iris.LOAD_POLICY` as :data:`iris.COMBINE_POLICY`, though the original names
   remain functional (and refer to the same things) for now.
   (:issue:`6203`, :pull:`6334`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ added new :meth:`~iris.cube.CubeList.combine` and
   :meth:`~iris.cube.CubeList.combine_cube` methods of a :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList`
   as an alternative way of accessing the :func:`~iris.util.combine_cubes` mechanism.
   (:issue:`6203`, :pull:`6334`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ added a new utility function :func:`~iris.util.combine_cubes`, to give
   general public access to the combine merge/concatenate mechanism introduced for
   generalised loading support via :class:`iris.LoadPolicy` in the Iris 3.11 release.
   (:issue:`6203`, :pull:`6334`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ overhauled the :class:`iris.LoadPolicy` facility by adding a new
   ``equalise_cubes_kwarg`` keyword, enabling it to call the
   :func:`~iris.util.equalise_cubes` utility function as one of its processing stages.
   (:issue:`6203`, :pull:`6334`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ added a new utility function :func:`~iris.util.equalise_cubes`, to help
   with aligning cubes so they can merge / concatenate.
   (:issue:`6248`, :pull:`6257`)

#. `@fnattino`_ added the lazy median aggregator :class:`iris.analysis.MEDIAN`
   based on the implementation discussed by `@rcomer`_ and `@stefsmeets`_ in
   :issue:`4039` (:pull:`6167`).

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ made :attr:`~iris.cube.Cube.data` optional in a
   :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`, when :attr:`~iris.cube.Cube.shape` is provided. A
   `dataless cube` may be used as a target in regridding, or as a template cube
   to add data to at a later time.

   This is the first step in providing `dataless cube` support. Currently, most
   cube methods won't work with a `dataless cube` and will raise an exception.
   However, :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.transpose` will work, as will
   :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.copy`. Note that, ``cube.copy(data=iris.DATALESS)``
   will provide a dataless copy of a cube. (:issue:`4447`, :pull:`6253`)

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ added the :mod:`iris.quickplot` ``footer`` kwarg to
   render text in the bottom right of the plot figure.
   (:issue:`6247`, :pull:`6332`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@pp-mo`_ added :const:`iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS` to
   capture objects that could not be loaded correctly, increasing transparency
   and helping users to fix loading problems via the Iris API. As a first pass,
   this is currently limited to ``standard_name`` and dimension coordinates from
   NetCDF files. (:issue:`6317`, :pull:`6338`)


🐛 Bugs Fixed
=============

#. `@rcomer`_ added handling for string stash codes when saving pp files.
   (:issue:`6239`, :pull:`6289`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@jrackham-mo`_ added a check for dtype castability when
   saving NetCDF ``valid_range``, ``valid_min`` and ``valid_max`` attributes -
   older NetCDF formats e.g. ``NETCDF4_CLASSIC`` support a maximum precision of
   32-bit. (:issue:`6178`, :pull:`6343`)

#. `@ukmo-ccbunney`_ added support for loading NetCDF variable-length string types
   and size hinting for better lazy loading (:issue:`6149`, :pull:`6340`)

#. `@bouweandela`_ fixed handling of masked Dask arrays in
   :func:`~iris.util.array_equal`.

#. `@trexfeathers`_ removed the custom ``setup.py develop`` command, since
   Setuptools are deprecating ``develop``; developers should instead
   use ``pip install -e .``. See `Running setuptools commands`_ for more.
   (:pull:`6424`)


💣 Incompatible Changes
=======================

#. :class:`iris.tests.IrisTest` is being replaced by :mod:`iris.tests._shared_utils`.
   Once conversion from unittest to pytest is completed, :class:`iris.tests.IrisTest`
   class will be deprecated.

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@pp-mo`_ significantly changed Iris' NetCDF loading
   warnings as part of the :const:`~iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS` work. Several
   loading operations no longer raise their own warnings; instead their loading
   problems are captured in :const:`~iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS`. When
   :const:`~iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS` is populated, a single
   :class:`~iris.warnings.IrisLoadWarning` is raised; see below.
   As a first pass, this changed behaviour is currently limited to
   ``standard_name`` and dimension coordinates from NetCDF files. (:pull:`6338`)

   .. code-block:: none

       IrisLoadWarning: Not all file objects were parsed correctly. See iris.loading.LOAD_PROBLEMS for details.


🚀 Performance Enhancements
===========================

#. `@bouweandela`_ made loading :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s from NetCDF files
   faster. (:pull:`6229` and :pull:`6252`)

#. `@fnattino`_ enabled lazy cube interpolation using the linear and
   nearest-neighbour interpolators (:class:`iris.analysis.Linear` and
   :class:`iris.analysis.Nearest`). Note that this implementation removes
   performance benefits linked to caching an interpolator object. While this does
   not break previously suggested code (instantiating and re-using an interpolator
   object remains possible), this is no longer an advertised feature. (:pull:`6084`)

#. `@bouweandela`_ made coordinate dimension lookups faster for derived
   coordinates. (:pull:`6337`)


🔥 Deprecations
===============

#. N/A


🔗 Dependencies
===============

#. `@stephenworsley`_ dropped support for ``py310`` and adopted support for ``py313``
   as per the `SPEC 0`_ schedule. (:pull:`6195`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ and `@valeriupredoi`_ removed the pin from dask since newer
   versions of dask fix the bug casuing the pin. Introduced a minimum pin (2025.1.0)
   to avoid this bug. (:pull:`6342`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ refactored Iris loading and saving to make it compatible
   with Dask version ``2025.4.0`` and above. (:pull:`6451`)

.. _3_12_3_array_comparison:

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@ukmo-ccbunney`_ adapted array comparison in response
   to NumPy v1.25 deprecating comparison of un-broadcastable arrays. It is
   hoped that users will see no difference in behaviour, but please get in touch
   if you notice anything. See `NumPy v1.25 expired deprecations`_ and
   `numpy#22707`_ for more. (:pull:`6665`)


📚 Documentation
================

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ created :ref:`contributing_pytest_conversions`
   as a guide for converting from ``unittest`` to ``pytest``. (:pull:`5785`)

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ created a style guide for ``pytest`` tests,
   and consolidated ``Test Categories`` and ``Testing Tools`` into
   :ref:`contributing_tests`. (:issue:`5574`, :pull:`5785`)

#. `@jfrost-mo`_ corrected ``unit`` to ``units`` in the docstring for
   :class:`iris.coords.AuxCoord`. (:issue:`6347`, :pull:`6348`)


💼 Internal
===========

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ `@pp-mo`_ `@bjlittle`_ `@trexfeathers`_ and `@HGWright`_ have
   converted around a third of Iris' ``unittest`` style tests to ``pytest``. This is
   part of an ongoing effort to move from ``unittest`` to ``pytest``. (:pull:`6207`,
   part of :issue:`6212`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_, `@ESadek-MO`_ and `@HGWright`_ heavily re-worked
   :doc:`/developers_guide/release_do_nothing` to be more thorough and apply
   lessons learned from recent releases. (:pull:`6062`)

#. `@schlunma`_ made lazy `smart weights <https://github.com/SciTools/iris/pull/5084>`_
   used for cube aggregations have the same chunks as their parent cube if broadcasting
   is necessary. (:issue:`6285`, :pull:`6288`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ improved the handling of benchmark environments, especially
   when working across Python versions. (:pull:`6329`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ temporarily pinned Sphinx to < 8.2.
   (:pull:`6344`, :issue:`6345`)

#. `@bouweandela`_ fixed a bug in the benchmarking code that caused all benchmarks
   to be run with lazy data. (:pull:`6339`)


.. comment
    Whatsnew author names (@github name) in alphabetical order. Note that,
    core dev names are automatically included by the common_links.inc:

.. _@fnattino: https://github.com/fnattino
.. _@jfrost-mo: https://github.com/jfrost-mo
.. _@stefsmeets: https://github.com/stefsmeets
.. _@valeriupredoi: https://github.com/valeriupredoi

.. comment
    Whatsnew resources in alphabetical order:

.. _SPEC 0: https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/
.. _Running setuptools commands: https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/deprecated/commands.html
.. _NumPy v1.25 expired deprecations: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/release/1.25.0-notes.html#expired-deprecations
.. _numpy#22707: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/22707
