.. include:: ../common_links.inc

v3.3 (1 Sep 2022)
*****************

This document explains the changes made to Iris for this release
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

.. dropdown:: |iris_version| v3.3.0 Release Highlights
   :color: primary
   :icon: info
   :animate: fade-in
   :open:

   The highlights for this minor release of Iris include:

   * We've added support for datums, loading them from NetCDF when the
     :obj:`iris.FUTURE.datum_support` flag is set.
   * We've greatly improved the speed of linear interpolation.
   * We've added the function :func:`iris.pandas.as_cubes` for richer
     conversion from Pandas.
   * We've improved the functionality of :func:`iris.util.mask_cube`.
   * We've improved the functionality and performance of the
     :obj:`iris.analysis.PERCENTILE` aggregator.
   * We've completed implementation of our :ref:`contributing.benchmarks`
     infrastructure.

   And finally, get in touch with us on :issue:`GitHub<new/choose>` if you have
   any issues or feature requests for improving Iris. Enjoy!


v3.3.1 (29 Sep 2022)
====================

.. dropdown:: v3.3.1 Patches
   :color: secondary
   :icon: alert
   :animate: fade-in

   The patches in this release of Iris include:

   #. `@pp-mo`_ fixed the Jupyter notebook display of :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList`.
      (:issue:`4973`, :pull:`4976`)

   #. `@pp-mo`_ fixed a bug in NAME loaders where data with no associated statistic would
      load as a cube with invalid cell-methods, which cannot be printed or saved to netcdf.
      (:issue:`3288`, :pull:`4933`)

   #. `@pp-mo`_ ensured that :data:`iris.cube.Cube.cell_methods` must always be an iterable
      of :class:`iris.coords.CellMethod` objects (:pull:`4933`).

   #. `@trexfeathers`_ advanced the Cartopy pin to ``>=0.21``, as Cartopy's
      change to default Transverse Mercator projection affects an Iris test.
      See `SciTools/cartopy@fcb784d`_ and `SciTools/cartopy@8860a81`_ for more
      details. (:pull:`4992`)

   #. `@trexfeathers`_ introduced the ``netcdf4!=1.6.1`` pin to avoid a
      problem with segfaults. (:pull:`4992`)


ðŸ“¢ Announcements
================

#. Welcome to `@krikru`_ who made their first contribution to Iris ðŸŽ‰


âœ¨ Features
===========

#. `@schlunma`_ added weighted aggregation over "group coordinates":
   :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by` now accepts the keyword `weights` if a
   :class:`~iris.analysis.WeightedAggregator` is used. (:issue:`4581`,
   :pull:`4589`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added support for ``false_easting`` and ``false_northing`` to
   :class:`~iris.coord_systems.Mercator`. (:issue:`3107`, :pull:`4524`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@wjbenfold`_ (reviewer) implemented lazy aggregation for the
   :obj:`iris.analysis.PERCENTILE` aggregator. (:pull:`3901`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ fixed cube arithmetic operation for cubes with meshes.
   (:issue:`4454`, :pull:`4651`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added support for CF-compliant treatment of
   ``standard_parallel`` and ``scale_factor_at_projection_origin`` to
   :class:`~iris.coord_systems.Mercator`. (:issue:`3844`, :pull:`4609`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added support datums associated with coordinate systems (e.g.
   :class:`~iris.coord_systems.GeogCS` other subclasses of
   :class:`~iris.coord_systems.CoordSystem`). Loading of datum information from
   a netCDF file only happens when the :obj:`iris.FUTURE.datum_support` flag is
   set. (:issue:`4619`, :pull:`4704`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@stephenworsley`_ (reviewer) added a maximum run length
   aggregator (:class:`~iris.analysis.MAX_RUN`). (:pull:`4676`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@rcomer`_ (reviewer) added a ``climatological`` keyword to
   :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by` that causes the climatological flag to
   be set and the point for each cell to equal its first bound, thereby
   preserving the time of year. (:issue:`1422`, :issue:`4098`, :issue:`4665`,
   :pull:`4723`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@pp-mo`_ (reviewer) implemented the
   :class:`~iris.coord_systems.PolarStereographic` CRS. (:issue:`4770`,
   :pull:`4773`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@wjbenfold`_ (reviewer) enabled passing of the
   :func:`numpy.percentile` keywords through the :obj:`~iris.analysis.PERCENTILE`
   aggregator. (:pull:`4791`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@bjlittle`_ (reviewer) implemented
   :func:`iris.plot.fill_between` and :func:`iris.quickplot.fill_between`.
   (:issue:`3493`, :pull:`4647`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@bjlittle`_ (reviewer) re-wrote :func:`iris.util.mask_cube`
   to provide lazy evaluation and greater flexibility with respect to input types.
   (:issue:`3936`, :pull:`4889`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ added a new kwarg ``expand_extras`` to
   :func:`iris.util.new_axis` which can be used to specify instances of
   :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord`, :class:`~iris.coords.CellMeasure` and
   :class:`~iris.coords.AncillaryVariable` which should also be expanded to map
   to the new axis. (:pull:`4896`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ updated to the latest CF Standard Names Table ``v79``
   (19 March 2022). (:pull:`4910`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ (reviewer) added
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_cubes`, which provides richer conversion from
   Pandas :class:`~pandas.Series` / :class:`~pandas.DataFrame`\s to one or more
   :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s. This includes: n-dimensional datasets,
   :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord`\s, :class:`~iris.coords.CellMeasure`\s,
   :class:`~iris.coords.AncillaryVariable`\s, and multi-dimensional
   coordinates. (:pull:`4890`)


ðŸ› Bugs Fixed
=============

#. `@rcomer`_ reverted part of the change from :pull:`3906` so that
   :func:`iris.plot.plot` no longer defaults to placing a "Y" coordinate (e.g.
   latitude) on the y-axis of the plot. (:issue:`4493`, :pull:`4601`)

#. `@rcomer`_ enabled passing of scalar objects to :func:`~iris.plot.plot` and
   :func:`~iris.plot.scatter`. (:pull:`4616`)

#. `@rcomer`_ fixed :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by` with `mdtol` for 1D
   cubes where an aggregated section is entirely masked, reported at
   :issue:`3190`.  (:pull:`4246`)

#. `@rcomer`_ ensured that a :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes`'s position is preserved
   when Iris replaces it with a :class:`cartopy.mpl.geoaxes.GeoAxes`, fixing
   :issue:`1157`.  (:pull:`4273`)

#. `@rcomer`_ fixed :meth:`~iris.coords.Coord.nearest_neighbour_index` for edge
   cases where the requested point is float and the coordinate has integer
   bounds, reported at :issue:`2969`. (:pull:`4245`)

#. `@rcomer`_ modified bounds setting on :obj:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` instances
   so that the order of the cell bounds is automatically reversed
   to match the coordinate's direction if necessary.  This is consistent with
   the `Bounds for 1-D coordinate variables` subsection of the `Cell Boundaries`_
   section of the CF Conventions and ensures that contiguity is preserved if a
   coordinate's direction is reversed. (:issue:`3249`, :issue:`423`,
   :issue:`4078`, :issue:`3756`, :pull:`4466`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@evertrol`_ prevented an ``AttributeError`` being logged
   to ``stderr`` when a :class:`~iris.fileformats.cf.CFReader` that fails to
   initialise is garbage collected. (:issue:`3312`, :pull:`4646`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ fixed plotting of circular coordinates to extend kwarg arrays
   as well as the data. (:issue:`466`, :pull:`4649`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@rcomer`_ (reviewer) corrected the axis on which masking
   is applied when an aggregator adds a trailing dimension. (:pull:`4755`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and  `@pp-mo`_  ensured that all methods to create or modify a
   :class:`iris.cube.CubeList` check that it only contains cubes.  According to
   code comments, this was supposedly already the case, but there were several bugs
   and loopholes. (:issue:`1897`, :pull:`4767`)

#. `@rcomer`_ modified cube arithmetic to handle mismatches in the cube's data
   array type.  This prevents masks being lost in some cases and therefore
   resolves :issue:`2987`.  (:pull:`3790`)

#. `@krikru`_ and `@rcomer`_ updated :mod:`iris.quickplot` such that the
   colorbar is added to the correct ``axes`` when specified as a keyword
   argument to a plotting routine. Otherwise, by default the colorbar will be
   added to the current axes of the current figure. (:pull:`4894`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@bjlittle`_ (reviewer) modified :func:`iris.util.mask_cube` so it
   either works in place or returns a new cube (:issue:`3717`, :pull:`4889`)


ðŸ’£ Incompatible Changes
=======================

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@bjlittle`_ (reviewer) updated Iris's calendar handling to be
   consistent with ``cf-units`` version 3.1.  In line with the `Calendar`_
   section in version 1.9 of the CF Conventions, we now use "standard" rather
   than the deprecated "gregorian" label for the default calendar.  Units may
   still be instantiated with ``calendar="gregorian"`` but their calendar
   attribute will be silently changed to "standard".  This may cause failures in
   code that explicitly checks the calendar attribute. (:pull:`4847`)


ðŸš€ Performance
==============

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added caching to the calculation of the points array in a
   :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` created using
   :meth:`~iris.coords.DimCoord.from_regular`. (:pull:`4698`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ introduced caching in :func:`_lazy_data._optimum_chunksize` and
   :func:`iris.fileformats.pp_load_rules._epoch_date_hours` to reduce time spent
   repeating calculations. (:pull:`4716`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ made :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.add_aux_factory` faster.
   (:pull:`4718`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@rcomer`_ (reviewer) permitted the fast percentile
   aggregation method to be used on masked data when the missing data tolerance
   is set to 0. (:issue:`4735`, :pull:`4755`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ improved the speed of linear interpolation using
   :meth:`iris.analysis.trajectory.interpolate` (:pull:`4366`)

#. NumPy ``v1.23`` behaviour changes mean that
   :func:`iris.experimental.ugrid.utils.recombine_submeshes` now uses ~3x as
   much memory; testing shows a ~16-million point mesh will now use ~600MB.
   Investigated by `@pp-mo`_ and `@trexfeathers`_. (:issue:`4845`)


ðŸ”¥ Deprecations
===============

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ (reviewer) deprecated
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_cube` in favour of the new
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_cubes` - see `âœ¨ Features`_ for more details.
   (:pull:`4890`)


ðŸ”— Dependencies
===============

#. `@rcomer`_ introduced the ``nc-time-axis >=1.4`` minimum pin, reflecting that
   we no longer use the deprecated :class:`nc_time_axis.CalendarDateTime`
   when plotting against time coordinates. (:pull:`4584`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ and `@bjlittle`_ (reviewer) unpinned ``pillow``. (:pull:`4826`)

#. `@rcomer`_ introduced the ``cf-units >=3.1`` minimum pin, reflecting the
   alignment of calendar behaviour in the two packages (see Incompatible Changes).
   (:pull:`4847`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ introduced the ``sphinx-gallery >=0.11.0`` minimum pin.
   (:pull:`4885`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ updated the install process to work with setuptools
   ``>=v64``, making ``v64`` the minimum compatible version. (:pull:`4903`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ introduced the ``shapely !=1.8.3``
   pin, avoiding a bug caused by its interaction with cartopy.
   (:pull:`4911`, :pull:`4917`)


ðŸ“š Documentation
================

#. `@tkknight`_ added a page to show the issues that have been voted for.  See
   :ref:`voted_issues_top`. (:issue:`3307`, :pull:`4617`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added a note about fixing proxy URLs in lockfiles generated
   because dependencies have changed. (:pull:`4666`)

#. `@lbdreyer`_ moved most of the User Guide's :class:`iris.Constraint` examples
   from :ref:`loading_iris_cubes` to :ref:`cube_extraction` and added an
   example of constraining on bounded time. (:pull:`4656`)

#. `@tkknight`_ adopted the `PyData Sphinx Theme`_ for the documentation.
   (:discussion:`4344`, :pull:`4661`)

#. `@tkknight`_ updated our developers guidance to show our intent to adopt
   numpydoc strings and fixed some API documentation rendering.
   See :ref:`docstrings`. (:issue:`4657`, :pull:`4689`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ added a page with examples of converting
   various mesh formats into the Iris Mesh Data Model. (:pull:`4739`)

#. `@rcomer`_ updated the "Load a Time Series of Data From the NEMO Model"
   gallery example. (:pull:`4741`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ added developer documentation to highlight some of the
   utilities offered by :class:`iris.IrisTest` and how to update CML and other
   output files. (:issue:`4544`, :pull:`4600`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@abooton`_ modernised the Iris logo to be SVG format.
   (:pull:`3935`)


ðŸ’¼ Internal
===========

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@pp-mo`_ finished implementing a mature benchmarking
   infrastructure (see :ref:`contributing.benchmarks`), building on 2 hard
   years of lessons learned ðŸŽ‰. (:pull:`4477`, :pull:`4562`, :pull:`4571`,
   :pull:`4583`, :pull:`4621`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ used the aforementioned benchmarking infrastructure to
   introduce deep (large 3rd dimension) loading and realisation benchmarks.
   (:pull:`4654`)

#. `@wjbenfold`_ made :func:`iris.tests.stock.simple_1d` respect the
   ``with_bounds`` argument. (:pull:`4658`)

#. `@lbdreyer`_ replaced `nose`_ with `pytest`_ as Iris' test runner.
   (:pull:`4734`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) migrated to GitHub Actions
   for Continuous-Integration. (:pull:`4503`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ made tests run certain linux executables from the Python env,
   specifically ncdump and ncgen.  These could otherwise fail when run in IDEs
   such as PyCharm and Eclipse, which don't automatically include the Python env
   bin in the system PATH.
   (:pull:`4794`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `@pp-mo`_ improved generation of stock NetCDF files.
   (:pull:`4827`, :pull:`4836`)

#. `@rcomer`_ removed some now redundant testing functions. (:pull:`4838`,
   :pull:`4878`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@jamesp`_ (reviewer) and `@lbdreyer`_ (reviewer) extended
   the GitHub Continuous-Integration to cover testing on ``py38``, ``py39``,
   and ``py310``. (:pull:`4840`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) adopted `setuptools-scm`_ for
   automated ``iris`` package versioning. (:pull:`4841`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) added building, testing and
   publishing of ``iris`` PyPI ``sdist`` and binary ``wheels`` as part of
   our GitHub Continuous-Integration. (:pull:`4849`)

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@wjbenfold`_ (reviewer) used ``pytest`` parametrization to
   streamline the gallery test code. (:pull:`4792`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ improved settings to better working with
   ``setuptools_scm``. (:pull:`4925`)


.. comment
    Whatsnew author names (@github name) in alphabetical order. Note that,
    core dev names are automatically included by the common_links.inc:

.. _@evertrol: https://github.com/evertrol
.. _@krikru: https://github.com/krikru


.. comment
    Whatsnew resources in alphabetical order:

.. _Calendar: https://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.9/cf-conventions.html#calendar
.. _Cell Boundaries: https://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.9/cf-conventions.html#cell-boundaries
.. _nose: https://nose.readthedocs.io
.. _PyData Sphinx Theme: https://pydata-sphinx-theme.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
.. _pytest: https://docs.pytest.org
.. _setuptools-scm: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm
.. _SciTools/cartopy@fcb784d: https://github.com/SciTools/cartopy/commit/fcb784daa65d95ed9a74b02ca292801c02bc4108
.. _SciTools/cartopy@8860a81: https://github.com/SciTools/cartopy/commit/8860a8186d4dc62478e74c83f3b2b3e8f791372e
