.. include:: ../common_links.inc

v3.4 (01 Dec 2022)
******************

This document explains the changes made to Iris for this release
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)


.. dropdown:: :opticon:`report` v3.4.0 Release Highlights
   :container: + shadow
   :title: text-primary text-center font-weight-bold
   :body: bg-light
   :animate: fade-in
   :open:

   The highlights for this minor release of Iris include:

   * We have **archived older Iris documentation** - everything before
     ``v3.0.0`` - so older versions will soon no longer appear in search
     engines. If you need this older documentation: please
     see :ref:`iris_support`.
   * We have added a :ref:`glossary` to the Iris documentation.
   * We have completed work to make **Pandas interoperability** handle
     n-dimensional :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s.
   * We have **begun refactoring Iris' regridding**, which has already improved
     performance and functionality, with more potential in future!
   * We have made several other significant `ðŸš€ Performance Enhancements`_.
   * Please note that **Iris cannot currently work with the latest NetCDF4
     releases**. The pin is set to ``<v1.6.1``, due to incompatibility with
     Iris' lack of thread safety. We're working hard to make Iris NetCDF
     loading thread safe as soon as possible.

   And finally, get in touch with us on :issue:`GitHub<new/choose>` if you have
   any issues or feature requests for improving Iris. Enjoy!


ðŸ“¢ Announcements
================

#. Welcome to `@ESadek-MO`_, `@TTV-Intrepid`_ and `@hsteptoe`_,  who made their
   first contributions to Iris ðŸŽ‰

   .. _try_experimental_stratify:

#. Do you enjoy `python-stratify`_? Did you know that Iris includes a
   convenience for using `python-stratify`_ with :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s?
   It has been 'experimental' for several years now, without receiving much
   feedback, so it's **use it or lose it** time: please try out
   :mod:`iris.experimental.stratify` and let us know what you think!


âœ¨ Features
===========

#. `@ESadek-MO`_ edited :func:`~iris.io.expand_filespecs` to allow expansion of
   non-existing paths, and added expansion functionality to :func:`~iris.io.save`.
   (:issue:`4772`, :pull:`4913`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ and `Julian Heming`_ added new mappings between CF
   standard names and UK Met Office LBFC codes. (:pull:`4859`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ changed the metadata of a face/edge-type
   :class:`~iris.experimental.ugrid.mesh.MeshCoord`, to be same as the face/edge
   coordinate in the mesh from which it takes its ``.points``.  Previously, all MeshCoords
   took their metadata from the node coord, but only a node-type MeshCoord now does
   that.  Also, the MeshCoord ``.var_name`` is now that of the underlying coord, whereas
   previously this was always None.  These changes make MeshCoord more like an ordinary
   :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord`, which avoids some specific known usage problems.
   (:issue:`4860`, :pull:`5020`)

#. `@Esadek-MO`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ added dim coord
   prioritisation to ``_get_lon_lat_coords()`` in :mod:`iris.analysis.cartography`.
   This allows :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights` and
   :func:`~iris.analysis.cartography.project` to handle cubes which contain
   both dim and aux coords of the same type e.g. ``longitude`` and ``grid_longitude``.
   (:issue:`3916`, :pull:`5029`).

#. `@stephenworsley`_ added the ability to regrid derived coordinates with the
   :obj:`~iris.analysis.PointInCell` regridding scheme. (:pull:`4807`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ made NetCDF loading more tolerant by enabling skipping of
   :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord`\s, :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord`\s,
   :class:`~iris.coords.CellMeasure`\s and
   :class:`~iris.coords.AncillaryVariable`\s if they cannot be added to a
   :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` (e.g. due to CF non-compliance). This is done via
   a new error class: :class:`~iris.exceptions.CannotAddError` (subclass of
   :class:`ValueError`). (:pull:`5054`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ implemented == and != comparisons for :class:`~iris.Constraint` s.
   A simple constraint is now == to another one constructed in the same way.
   However, equality is limited for more complex cases :  value-matching functions must
   be the same identical function, and for &-combinations order is significant,
   i.e.  ``(c1 & c2) != (c2 & c1)``.
   (:issue:`3616`, :pull:`3749`).

#. `@hsteptoe`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ improved
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_data_frame`\'s conversion of :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s to
   :class:`~pandas.DataFrame`\s. This includes better handling of multiple
   :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` dimensions, auxiliary coordinates and attribute
   information. **Note:** the improvements are opt-in, by setting the
   :obj:`iris.FUTURE.pandas_ndim` flag (see :class:`iris.Future` for more).
   (:issue:`4526`, :pull:`4909`, :pull:`4669`, :pull:`5059`, :pull:`5074`)


ðŸ› Bugs Fixed
=============

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@pp-mo`_ (reviewer) factored masking into the returned
   sum-of-weights calculation from :obj:`~iris.analysis.SUM`. (:pull:`4905`)

#. `@schlunma`_ fixed a bug which prevented using
   :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.collapsed` on coordinates whose number of bounds
   differs from 0 or 2. This enables the use of this method on mesh
   coordinates. (:issue:`4672`, :pull:`4870`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ (reviewer) fixed the building of the CF
   Standard Names module ``iris.std_names`` for the ``setup.py`` commands
   ``develop`` and ``std_names``. (:issue:`4951`, :pull:`4952`)

#. `@lbdreyer`_ and `@pp-mo`_ (reviewer) fixed the cube print out such that
   scalar ancillary variables are displayed in a dedicated section rather than
   being added to the vector ancillary variables section. Further, ancillary
   variables and cell measures that map to a cube dimension of length 1 are now
   included in the respective vector sections. (:pull:`4945`)

#. `@rcomer`_ removed some old redundant code that prevented determining the
   order of time cells. (:issue:`4697`, :pull:`4729`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ improved the accuracy of the error messages for
   :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.coord` when failing to find coordinates in the case where
   a coordinate is given as the argument. Similarly, improved the error messages for
   :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.cell_measure` and :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.ancillary_variable`.
   (:issue:`4898`, :pull:`4928`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ fixed a bug which caused derived coordinates to be realised
   after calling :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by`. (:issue:`3637`, :pull:`4947`)

#. `@rcomer`_ corrected the ``standard_name`` mapping from UM stash code ``m01s30i311``
   to indicate that this is the upward, rather than northward part of the flow.
   (:pull:`5060`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) fixed an issue which prevented
   uncompressed PP fields with additional trailing padded words in the field
   data to be loaded and saved. (:pull:`5058`)

#. `@lbdreyer`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) fixed the handling of data when
   regridding with :class:`~iris.analysis.UnstructuredNearest` or calling
   :func:`~iris.analysis.trajectory.interpolate` such that the data type and mask is
   preserved. (:issue:`4463`, :pull:`5062`)


ðŸ’£ Incompatible Changes
=======================

#. `@trexfeathers`_ altered testing to accept new Dask copying behaviour from
   `dask/dask#9555`_ - copies of a Dask array created using ``da.from_array()``
   will all ``compute()`` to a shared identical array. So creating a
   :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` using ``Cube(data=da.from_array(...``, then
   using :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.copy`,
   will produce two :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`\s that both return an identical
   array when requesting :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` :attr:`~iris.cube.Cube.data`.
   We do not expect this to affect typical user workflows but please get in
   touch if you need help. (:pull:`5041`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ moved ``iris.experimental.animate.animate()`` to
   :func:`iris.plot.animate`, in recognition of its successful use over several
   years since introduction. (:pull:`5056`)


ðŸš€ Performance Enhancements
===========================

#. `@rcomer`_ and `@pp-mo`_ (reviewer) increased aggregation speed for
   :obj:`~iris.analysis.SUM`, :obj:`~iris.analysis.COUNT` and
   :obj:`~iris.analysis.PROPORTION` on real data. (:pull:`4905`)

#. `@bouweandela`_ made :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cells` faster for time
   coordinates. This also affects :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract`,
   :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.subset`, and :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.intersect`.
   (:pull:`4969`)

#. `@bouweandela`_ improved the speed of :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.subset` /
   :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.intersect`.
   (:pull:`4955`)

#. `@stephenworsley`_ improved the speed of the :obj:`~iris.analysis.PointInCell`
   regridding scheme. (:pull:`4807`)


ðŸ”¥ Deprecations
===============

#. `@hsteptoe`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ (reviewer) deprecated
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_series` in favour of the new
   :func:`iris.pandas.as_data_frame` - see `âœ¨ Features`_ for more details.
   (:pull:`4669`)


ðŸ”— Dependencies
===============

#. `@rcomer`_ introduced the ``dask >=2.26`` minimum pin, so that Iris can benefit
   from Dask's support for `NEP13`_ and `NEP18`_. (:pull:`4905`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ advanced the Cartopy pin to ``>=0.21``, as Cartopy's
   change to default Transverse Mercator projection affects an Iris test.
   See `SciTools/cartopy@fcb784d`_ and `SciTools/cartopy@8860a81`_ for more
   details.
   (:pull:`4968`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ introduced the ``netcdf4<1.6.1`` pin to avoid a problem
   with segfaults. (:pull:`4968`, :pull:`5075`, :issue:`5016`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ updated the Matplotlib colormap registration in
   :mod:`iris.palette` in response to a deprecation warning. Using the new
   Matplotlib API also means a ``matplotlib>=3.5`` pin. (:pull:`4998`)

#. See `ðŸ’£ Incompatible Changes`_ for notes about `dask/dask#9555`_.


ðŸ“š Documentation
================

#. `@ESadek-MO`_, `@TTV-Intrepid`_ and `@trexfeathers`_ added a gallery example for zonal
   means plotted parallel to a cartographic plot. (:pull:`4871`)

#. `@Esadek-MO`_ added a key-terms :ref:`glossary` page into the user guide. (:pull:`4902`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ added a :ref:`code example <ORCA_example>`
   for converting ORCA-gridded data to an unstructured cube. (:pull:`5013`)
#. `@Esadek-MO`_ added links to relevant Gallery examples within the User Guide
   to improve understanding. (:pull:`5009`)

#. `@trexfeathers`_ changed the warning header for the **latest** documentation
   to reference Read the Docs' built-in version switcher, instead of generating
   its own independent links. (:pull:`5055`)

#. `@tkknight`_ updated the links for the Iris documentation to v2.4 and
   earlier to point to the archive of zip files instead. (:pull:`5064`)

#. `@Esadek-MO`_ began adding notes at the bottom of functions to
   to clarify if the function preserves laziness or not. See :issue:`3292` for
   the ongoing checklist. (:pull:`5066`)

ðŸ’¼ Internal
===========

#. `@rcomer`_ removed the obsolete ``setUpClass`` method from Iris testing.
   (:pull:`4927`)

#. `@bjlittle`_ and `@lbdreyer`_ (reviewer) removed support for
   ``python setup.py test``, which is a deprecated approach to executing
   package tests, see `pypa/setuptools#1684`_.  Also performed assorted
   ``setup.py`` script hygiene. (:pull:`4948`, :pull:`4949`, :pull:`4950`)

#. `@pp-mo`_ split the module :mod:`iris.fileformats.netcdf` into separate
   :mod:`~iris.fileformats.netcdf.loader` and :mod:`~iris.fileformats.netcdf.saver`
   submodules, just to make the code easier to handle.

#. `@trexfeathers`_ adapted the benchmark for importing :mod:`iris.palette` to
   cope with new colormap behaviour in Matplotlib `v3.6`. (:pull:`4998`)

#. `@rcomer`_ removed a now redundant workaround for an old matplotlib bug,
   highlighted by :issue:`4090`.  (:pull:`4999`)

#. `@rcomer`_ added the ``show`` option to the documentation Makefiles, as a
   convenient way for contributors to view their built documentation.
   (:pull:`5000`)

.. comment
    Whatsnew author names (@github name) in alphabetical order. Note that,
    core dev names are automatically included by the common_links.inc:

.. _@TTV-Intrepid: https://github.com/TTV-Intrepid
.. _Julian Heming: https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/people/julian-heming
.. _@hsteptoe: https://github.com/hsteptoe


.. comment
    Whatsnew resources in alphabetical order:

.. _NEP13: https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0013-ufunc-overrides.html
.. _NEP18: https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0018-array-function-protocol.html
.. _pypa/setuptools#1684: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/issues/1684
.. _SciTools/cartopy@fcb784d: https://github.com/SciTools/cartopy/commit/fcb784daa65d95ed9a74b02ca292801c02bc4108
.. _SciTools/cartopy@8860a81: https://github.com/SciTools/cartopy/commit/8860a8186d4dc62478e74c83f3b2b3e8f791372e
.. _dask/dask#9555: https://github.com/dask/dask/pull/9555
