What's new in Iris 1.0
**********************

:Release: 1.0.0
:Date: 15 Oct, 2012

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.0.
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

With the release of Iris 1.0, we have broadly completed the transition
to the CF data model, and established a stable foundation for future
work. Following this release we plan to deliver significant performance
improvements and additional features.


The role of 1.x
===============

The 1.x series of releases is intended to provide a relatively stable,
backwards-compatible platform based on the CF-netCDF data model, upon
which long-lived services can be built.

Iris 1.0 targets the data model implicit in CF-netCDF 1.5. This will be
extended to cover the new features of CF-netCDF 1.6 (e.g. discrete
sampling geometries) and any subsequent versions which maintain
backwards compatibility. Similarly, as the efforts of the CF community
to formalise their data model reach maturity, they will be included
in Iris where significant backwards-compatibility can be maintained.


Iris 1.0 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.0:

* Hybrid-pressure vertical coordinates, and the ability to load from GRIB.
* Initial support for CF-style coordinate systems.
* Use of Cartopy for mapping in matplotlib.
* Load data from NIMROD files.
* Availability of Cynthia Brewer colour palettes.
* Add a citation to a plot.
* Ensures netCDF files are properly closed.
* The ability to bypass merging when loading data.
* Save netCDF files with an unlimited dimension.
* A more explicit set of load functions, which also allow the automatic
  cube merging to be bypassed as a last resort.
* The ability to project a cube with a lat-lon or rotated lat-lon coordinate
  system into a range of map projections e.g. Polar Stereographic.


Incompatible changes
--------------------
* The "source" and "history" metadata are now represented as Cube
  attributes, where previously they used coordinates.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.coord_dims()` now returns a tuple instead of a list.
* The ``iris.plot.gcm`` and ``iris.plot.map_setup`` functions are now removed.
  See :ref:`whats-new-cartopy` for further details.

Deprecations
------------
* The methods :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cos()` and
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.sin()` have been deprecated.
* The :func:`iris.load_strict()` function has been deprecated. Code
  should now use the :func:`iris.load_cube()` and
  :func:`iris.load_cubes()` functions instead.


CF-netCDF coordinate systems
============================

The coordinate systems in Iris are now defined by the CF-netCDF
`grid mappings <http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/apf.html>`_.
As of Iris 1.0 a subset of the CF-netCDF coordinate systems are
supported, but this will be expanded in subsequent versions. Adding
this code is a relatively simple, incremental process - it would make a
good task to tackle for users interested in getting involved in
contributing to the project.

The coordinate systems available in Iris 1.0 and their corresponding
Iris classes are:

================================================================================================== =========================================
CF name                                                                                            Iris class
================================================================================================== =========================================
`Latitude-longitude <http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/apf.html#idp7779520>`_  :class:`~iris.coord_systems.GeogCS`
`Rotated pole <http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/apf.html#idp7844592>`_        :class:`~iris.coord_systems.RotatedGeogCS`
`Transverse Mercator <http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/apf.html#idp7872672>`_ :class:`~iris.coord_systems.TransverseMercator`
================================================================================================== =========================================

For convenience, Iris also includes the :class:`~iris.coord_systems.OSGB`
class which provides a simple way to create the transverse Mercator
coordinate system used by the British
`Ordnance Survey <http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/>`_.


.. _whats-new-cartopy:

Using Cartopy for mapping in matplotlib
=======================================

The underlying map drawing package has now been updated to use
`Cartopy <http://scitools.github.com/cartopy>`_. Cartopy provides a
highly flexible set of mapping tools, with a consistent, intuitive
interface. As yet it doesn't have feature-parity with basemap, but its
goal is to make maps "just work", making it the perfect complement to Iris.

The ``iris.plot.map_setup`` function has now been replaced with a cleaner
interface:

    * To draw a cube on its native map project, one can simply draw the cube directly::

            import iris.plot as iplt
            import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

            iplt.contourf(cube)
            plt.gca().coastlines()
            plt.show()

    * To draw a cube on the native map and extents of another, one can use the
      :func:`iris.plot.default_projection` and
      :func:`iris.plot.default_projection_extent` functions::

            import iris.plot as iplt
            import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

            cube1_projection = iplt.default_projection(cube1)
            cube1_extent = iplt.default_projection_extent(cube1)

            ax = plt.axes(projection=cube1_projection)
            ax.set_extent(cube1_extent, cube1_projection)
            iplt.contourf(cube2)
            ax.coastlines()
            plt.show()

.. note::

    The ``iris.plot.gcm`` function to get the current map is now
    redundant; instead the current map *is* the current matplotlib axes,
    and :func:`matplotlib.pyplot.gca` should be used instead.

For more examples of what can be done with Cartopy, see the Iris gallery and
`Cartopy's documentation  <http://scitools.github.com/cartopy>`_.


Hybrid-pressure
===============

With the introduction of the :class:`~iris.aux_factory.HybridPressureFactory`
class, it is now possible to represent data expressed on a
hybrid-pressure vertical coordinate, as defined by the second variant in
`Appendix D <http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/apd.html#idp7406304>`_.
A hybrid-pressure factory is created with references to the coordinates
which provide the components of the hybrid coordinate ("ap" and "b") and
the surface pressure. In return, it provides a virtual "pressure"
coordinate whose values are derived from the given components.

This facility is utilised by the GRIB2 loader to automatically provide
the derived "pressure" coordinate for certain data [#f1]_ from the
`ECMWF <http://www.ecmwf.int/>`_.

.. [#f1] Where the level type is either 105 or 119, and where the
         surface pressure has an ECMWF paramId of
         `152 <http://www.ecmwf.int/publications/manuals/d/gribapi/param/detail/format=grib2/pid=152/>`_.


NetCDF
======

When saving a Cube to a netCDF file, Iris will now define the outermost
dimension as an unlimited/record dimension. In combination with the
:meth:`iris.cube.Cube.transpose` method, this allows any dimension to
take the role of the unlimited/record dimension.

For example, a Cube with the structure::

    <iris 'Cube' of air_potential_temperature (time: 6; model_level_number: 70; grid_latitude: 100; grid_longitude: 100)>

would result in a netCDF file whose CDL definition would include::

    dimensions:
            time = UNLIMITED ; // (6 currently)
            model_level_number = 70 ;
            grid_latitude = 100 ;
            grid_longitude = 100 ;

Also, Iris will now ensure that netCDF files are properly closed when
they are no longer in use. Previously this could cause problems when
dealing with large numbers of netCDF files, or in long running
processes.


Brewer colour palettes
======================

Iris includes a selection of carefully designed colour palettes produced
by Cynthia Brewer. The :mod:`iris.palette` module registers the Brewer
colour palettes with matplotlib, so they are explicitly selectable via
the :func:`matplotlib.pyplot.set_cmap` function. For example::

    import iris.palette
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    plt.contourf(np.random.randn(10, 10))
    plt.set_cmap('brewer_RdBu_11')
    plt.show()

Citations
---------
Citations can easily be added to a plot using the :func:`iris.plot.citation`
function. The recommended text for the Cynthia Brewer citation is provided
by :data:`iris.plot.BREWER_CITE`.

To include a reference in a journal article or report please refer to
`section 5 <http://www.personal.psu.edu/cab38/ColorBrewer/ColorBrewer_updates.html>`_
in the citation guidance provided by Cynthia Brewer.


Metadata attributes
===================

Iris now stores "source" and "history" metadata in Cube attributes.
For example::

    >>> print iris.tests.stock.global_pp()
    air_temperature                     (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
         ...
         Attributes:
              ...
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         ...

Where previously it would have appeared as::

    air_temperature                     (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
         ...
         Scalar coordinates:
              ...
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         ...

.. note::

    This change breaks backwards compatibility with Iris 0.9. But
    if it is desirable to have the "source" metadata expressed as a
    coordinate then it can be done with the following pattern::

        src = cube.attributes.pop('source')
        src_coord = iris.coords.AuxCoord(src, long_name='source')
        cube.add_aux_coord(src_coord)


New loading functions
=====================

The main functions for loading cubes are now:
  - :func:`iris.load()`
  - :func:`iris.load_cube()`
  - :func:`iris.load_cubes()`

These provide convenient cube loading suitable for both interactive
(:func:`iris.load()`) and scripted (:func:`iris.load_cube()`,
:func:`iris.load_cubes()`) usage.

In addition, :func:`iris.load_raw()` has been provided as a last resort
for situations where the automatic cube merging is not appropriate.
However, if you find you need to use this function we would encourage
you to contact the Iris developers so we can see if a fix can be made
to the cube merge algorithm.

The :func:`iris.load_strict()` function has been deprecated. Code should
now use the :func:`iris.load_cube()` and :func:`iris.load_cubes()`
functions instead.


Cube projection
===============

Iris now has the ability to project a cube into a number of map projections.
This functionality is provided by :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.project()`.
For example::

    import iris
    import cartopy.crs as ccrs
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    # Load data
    cube = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))

    # Transform cube to target projection
    target_proj = ccrs.RotatedPole(pole_longitude=177.5,
                                   pole_latitude=37.5)
    new_cube, extent = iris.analysis.cartography.project(cube, target_proj)

    # Plot
    plt.axes(projection=target_proj)
    plt.pcolor(new_cube.coord('projection_x_coordinate').points,
               new_cube.coord('projection_y_coordinate').points,
               new_cube.data)
    plt.gca().coastlines()
    plt.show()

This function is intended to be used in cases where the cube's coordinates
prevent one from directly visualising the data, e.g. when the longitude
and latitude are two dimensional and do not make up a regular grid. The
function uses a nearest neighbour approach rather than any form of
linear/non-linear interpolation to determine the data value of each cell
in the resulting cube. Consequently it may have an adverse effect on the
statistics of the data e.g. the mean and standard deviation will not be
preserved. This function currently assumes global data and will if
necessary extrapolate beyond the geographical extent of the source cube.


Other changes
=============
* Cube summaries are now more readable when the scalar coordinates
  contain bounds.
