What's New in Iris 1.10
***********************

:Release: 1.10
:Date: 5th September 2016

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.10
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

Iris 1.10 Features
==================
.. _iris_grib_added:

* Support has now been added for the
  `iris_grib <https://github.com/SciTools/iris-grib>`_ package, which
  provides GRIB format support in an optional package, separate from Iris.

  * If ``iris_grib`` is available, it will always be used in place of the older
    iris module :mod:`iris.fileformats.grib`.

  * The capabilities of ``iris_grib`` are essentially the same as the existing
    :mod:`iris.fileformats.grib` when used with ``iris.FUTURE.strict_grib_load=True``,
    with only small detail differences.

  * The old :mod:`iris.fileformats.grib` module is now deprecated and may shortly be
    removed.

    * If you are already using the recommended :data:`iris.FUTURE` setting
      ``iris.FUTURE.strict_grib_load=True`` this should not cause problems, as
      the new package is all-but identical.

      * However, the option ``iris.FUTURE.strict_grib_load`` is itself now
        deprecated, so you should remove code that sets it.

    * If, however, your code is still using the older "non-strict" grib
      loading, then you may need to make code changes.

      * In particular, the ``field`` object passed to load callbacks is
        different.
        See :class:`iris.fileformats.grib.message.GribMessage` (the
        ``iris_grib.message.GribMessage`` class is the same as this, for now).

  * Please exercise your code with the new iris_grib module, and let us know of
    any problems you uncover, such as files that will no longer load with the
    new implementation.

* :meth:`iris.experimental.regrid.PointInCell.regridder` now works across coordinate systems, including non latlon systems. Additionally, the requirement that the source data X and Y coordinates be 2D has been removed. NB: some aspects of this change are backwards incompatible.
* Plotting non-Gregorian calendars is now supported. This adds `nc_time_axis <https://github.com/SciTools/nc-time-axis>`_ as a dependency.
* Promoting a scalar coordinate to a dimension coordinate with :func:`iris.util.new_axis` no longer loads deferred data.
* The parsing functionality for Cell Methods from netCDF files is available as part of the :mod:`iris.fileformats.netcdf` module as :func:`iris.fileformats.netcdf.parse_cell_methods`.
* Support for the NameIII Version 2 file format has been added.
* Loading netcdf data in Mercator and Stereographic projections now accepts optional extra projection parameter attributes (``false_easting``, ``false_northing`` and ``scale_factor_at_projection_origin``), if they match the default values.

  * NetCDF files which define a Mercator projection where the ``false_easting``, ``false_northing`` and ``scale_factor_at_projection_origin`` match the defaults will have the projection loaded correctly. Otherwise, a warning will be issued for each parameter that does not match the default and the projection will not be loaded.
  * NetCDF files which define a Steroegraphic projection where the ``scale_factor_at_projection_origin`` is equal to 1.0 will have the projection loaded correctly. Otherwise, a warning will be issued and the projection will not be loaded.

* The :mod:`iris.plot` routines :func:`~iris.plot.contour`, :func:`~iris.plot.contourf`, :func:`~iris.plot.outline`, :func:`~iris.plot.pcolor`, :func:`~iris.plot.pcolormesh` and :func:`~iris.plot.points` now support plotting cubes with anonymous dimensions by specifying the *numeric index* of the anonymous dimension within the ``coords`` keyword argument.

  Note that the axis of the anonymous dimension will be plotted in index space.

* NetCDF loading and saving now supports Cubes that use the LambertConformal coordinate system.
* The experimental structured Fieldsfile loader :func:`~iris.experimental.fieldsfile.load` has been extended to also load structured PP files.

  Structured loading is a streamlined operation, offering the benefit of a significantly faster loading alternative to the more generic :func:`iris.load` mechanism.

  Note that structured loading is not an optimised wholesale replacement of :func:`iris.load`. Structured loading is restricted to input containing contiguously ordered fields for each phenomenon that repeat regularly over the same vertical levels and times. For further details, see :func:`~iris.experimental.fieldsfile.load` 

* :mod:`iris.experimental.regrid_conservative` is now compatible with ESMPy v7.
* Saving zonal (i.e. longitudinal) means to PP files now sets the '64s' bit in LBPROC.
* Loading of 'little-endian' PP files is now supported.
* All appropriate :mod:`iris.plot` functions now handle an ``axes`` keyword, allowing use of the object oriented matplotlib interface rather than pyplot.
* The ability to pass file format object lists into the rules based load pipeline, as used for GRIB, Fields Files and PP has been added.  The :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.load_pairs_from_fields` and :func:`iris.fileformats.grib.load_pairs_from_fields` are provided to produce cubes from such lists.  These lists may have been filtered or altered using the appropriate :mod:`iris.fileformats` modules.
* Cubes can now have an 'hour' coordinate added with :meth:`iris.coord_categorisation.add_hour`.
* Time coordinates from PP fields with an lbcode of the form 3xx23 are now correctly encoded with a 360-day calendar.
* The loading from and saving to netCDF of CF cell_measure variables is supported, along with their representation within a Cube as :attr:`~iris.cube.Cube.cell_measures`.
* Cubes with anonymous dimensions can now be concatenated. This can only occur along a dimension that is not anonymous.
* NetCDF saving of ``valid_range``, ``valid_min`` and ``valid_max`` cube attributes is now allowed.

Bugs Fixed
==========
* Altered Cell Methods to display coordinate's standard_name rather than var_name where appropriate to avoid human confusion.
* Saving multiple cubes with netCDF4 protected attributes should now work as expected.
* Concatenating cubes with singleton dimensions (dimensions of size one) now works properly.
* Fixed the ``grid_mapping_name`` and ``secant_latitudes`` handling for the LambertConformal coordinate system.
* Fixed bug in :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.project` where the output projection coordinates didn't have units.
* Attempting to use :meth:`iris.sample_data_path` to access a file that isn't actually Iris sample data now raises a more descriptive error. A note about the appropriate use of `sample_data_path` has also been added to the documentation.
* Fixed a bug where regridding or interpolation with the :class:`~iris.analysis.Nearest` scheme returned floating-point results even when the source data was integer typed. It now always returns the same type as the source data.
* Fixed a bug where regridding circular data would ignore any source masking. This affected any regridding using the :class:`~iris.analysis.Linear` and :class:`~iris.analysis.Nearest` schemes, and also :func:`iris.analysis.interpolate.linear`.
* The ``coord_name`` parameter to :func:`~iris.fileformats.rules.scalar_cell_method` is now checked correctly.
* LBPROC is set correctly when a cube containing the minimum of a variable is saved to a PP file. The IA component of LBTIM is set correctly when saving maximum or minimum values.
* The performance of :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract` when a list of values is given to an instance of :class:`iris.Constraint` has been improved considerably.
* Fixed a bug with :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.data` where an :class:`numpy.ndarray` was not being returned for scalar cubes with lazy data.
* When saving in netcdf format, the units of 'latitude' and 'longitude' coordinates specified in 'degrees' are saved as 'degrees_north' and 'degrees_east' respectively, as defined in the CF conventions for netCDF files: sections 4.1 and 4.2.
* Fixed a bug with a class of pp files with lbyr == 0, where the date would cause errors when converting to a datetime object (e.g. when printing a cube).

  When processing a pp field with lbtim = 2x, lbyr == lbyrd == 0 and lbmon == lbmond, 'month' and 'month_number' coordinates are created instead of 'time'.

* Fixed a bug in :meth:`~iris.analysis.calculus.curl` where the sign of the r-component for spherical coordinates was opposite to what was expected.  
* A bug that prevented cube printing in some cases has been fixed.
* Fixed a bug where a deepcopy of a :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` would have writable ``points`` and ``bounds`` arrays. These arrays can now no longer be modified in-place.
* Concatenation no longer occurs when the auxiliary coordinates of the cubes do not match. This check is not applied to AuxCoords that span the dimension the concatenation is occuring along. This behaviour can be switched off by setting the ``check_aux_coords`` kwarg in :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate` to False.
* Fixed a bug in :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.subset` where an exception would be thrown while trying to subset over a non-dimensional scalar coordinate.

Incompatible Changes
====================
* The source and target for :meth:`iris.experimental.regrid.PointInCell.regridder` must now have defined coordinate systems (i.e. not ``None``). Additionally, the source data X and Y coordinates must have the same cube dimensions.

Deprecations
============
* Deprecated the :class:`iris.Future` option
  ``iris.FUTURE.strict_grib_load``.
  This only affected the module :mod:`iris.fileformats.grib`, which is itself
  now deprecated.
  Please see :ref:`iris_grib package <iris_grib_added>`, above.
* Deprecated the module :mod:`iris.fileformats.grib`.  The new package
  `iris_grib <https://github.com/SciTools/iris-grib>`_ replaces this
  fuctionality, which will shortly be removed.
  Please see :ref:`iris_grib package <iris_grib_added>`, above.
* The use of :data:`iris.config.SAMPLE_DATA_DIR` has been deprecated and replaced by the now importable `iris_sample_data <https://github.com/SciTools/iris-sample-data>`_ package.
 
* Deprecated the module :mod:`iris.analysis.interpolate`.
  This contains the following public items, all of which are now deprecated and
  will be removed in a future release:

    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.linear`
    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.regrid`
    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.regrid_to_max_resolution`
    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.nearest_neighbour_indices`
    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.nearest_neighbour_data_value`
    * :func:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.extract_nearest_neighbour`
    * class :class:`~iris.analysis.interpolate.Linear1dExtrapolator`.

  Please use the replacement facilities individually noted in the module
  documentation for :mod:`iris.analysis.interpolate`
* The method :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.regridded` has been deprecated.
  Please use :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.regrid` instead (see
  :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.regridded` for details).
* Deprecated :data:`iris.fileformats.grib.hindcast_workaround` and :class:`iris.fileformats.grib.GribWrapper`. The class :class:`iris.fileformats.grib.message.GribMessage` provides alternative means of working with GRIB message instances.
* Deprecated the module :mod:`iris.fileformats.ff`.  Please use the replacement
  facilities in module :mod:`iris.fileformats.um` :

  * :func:`iris.fileformats.um.um_to_pp` replaces :class:`iris.fileformats.ff.FF2PP`.
  * :func:`iris.fileformats.um.load_cubes` replaces :func:`iris.fileformats.ff.load_cubes`.
  * :func:`iris.fileformats.um.load_cubes_32bit_ieee` replaces :func:`iris.fileformats.ff.load_cubes_32bit_ieee`.

  All other public components are generally deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

* The :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.as_pairs` and :func:`iris.fileformats.grib.as_pairs` are deprecated.  These are replaced with :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.save_pairs_from_cube` and :func:`iris.fileformats.grib.save_pairs_from_cube`.
* ``iris.fileformats.pp_packing`` has been deprecated. Please install the separate `mo_pack <https://github.com/SciTools/mo_pack>`_ package instead. This provides the same functionality.
* Deprecated logging functions (currently used only for rules logging):  
 :data:`iris.config.iris.config.RULE_LOG_DIR`,
 :data:`iris.config.iris.config.RULE_LOG_IGNORE` and
 :data:`iris.fileformats.rules.log`.

* Deprecated all the remaining text rules mechanisms:  
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.DebugString`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.CMAttribute`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.CMCustomAttribute`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.CoordAndDims`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.Rule`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.FunctionRule`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.ProcedureRule`,
 :class:`iris.fileformats.rules.RulesContainer` and
 :func:`iris.fileformats.rules.calculate_forecast_period`.

* Deprecated the custom pp save rules mechanism implemented by the functions :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.add_save_rules` and :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.reset_save_rules`. The functions :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.as_fields`, :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.as_pairs` and :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.save_fields` provide alternative means of achieving the same ends.

Documentation Changes
=====================
* It is now clear that repeated values will form a group under :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by` even if they aren't consecutive. Hence, the documentation for :mod:`iris.cube` has been changed to reflect this.
* The documentation for :meth:`iris.analysis.calculus.curl` has been updated for clarity.
* False claims about :meth:`iris.fileformats.pp.save`, :meth:`iris.fileformats.pp.as_pairs`, and :meth:`iris.fileformats.pp.as_fields` being able to take instances of :class:`iris.cube.CubeList` as inputs have been removed.
* A :doc:`new code example <../examples/Meteorology/wind_speed>`, demonstrating the use of a quiver plot to display wind speeds over Lake Victoria, has been added.
* The docstring for :data:`iris.analysis.SUM` has been updated to explicitly state that weights passed to it aren't normalised internally.
* A note regarding the impossibility of partially collapsing multi-dimensional coordinates has been added to the user guide.

