What's New in Iris 1.12
***********************

:Release: 1.12
:Date: 2017-01-10

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.12
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

Iris 1.12 Features
==================
.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Showcase Feature - New regridding schemes ...

  A new regridding scheme, :class:`iris.analysis.UnstructuredNearest`,
  performs nearest-neighbour regridding from "unstructured" onto "structured" grids.
  Here, "unstructured" means that the data has X and Y coordinate values
  defined at each horizontal location, instead of the independent X and Y
  dimensions that constitute a structured grid.
  For example, data sampled on a trajectory or a tripolar ocean grid would be unstructured.

  The essential purpose is the same as
  :class:`iris.experimental.regrid.ProjectedUnstructuredNearest`.
  This scheme, by comparison, is generally more accurate, but slower.

  In addition : added experimental ProjectedUnstructured regridders which use scipy.interpolate.griddata to regrid unstructured data (see :class:`iris.experimental.regrid.ProjectedUnstructuredLinear` and :class:`iris.experimental.regrid.ProjectedUnstructuredNearest`)

.. admonition:: Showcase Feature - Fast UM file loading

  Support has been added for accelerated loading of UM files (PP and
  Fieldsfile), when these have a suitable regular "structured" form.

  A context manager is used to enable fast um loading in all the regular iris
  load functions, such as :meth:`iris.load` and :meth:`iris.load_cube`,
  when loading data from UM file types.
  For example:

        >>> import iris
        >>> filepath = iris.sample_data_path('uk_hires.pp')
        >>> from iris.fileformats.um import structured_um_loading
        >>> with structured_um_loading():
        ...     cube = iris.load_cube(filepath, 'air_potential_temperature')

  This approach can deliver loading which is 10 times faster or more.
  For example :

  * a 78 Gb fieldsfile of 51,840 fields loads in about 13 rather than 190
    seconds.
  * a set of 25 800Mb PP files loads in about 21 rather than 220 seconds.

  You can load data with structured loading and compare the results with those
  from "normal" loading to check whether they are equivalent.

  * The results will normally differ, if at all, only in having dimensions in a
    different order or a different choice of dimension coordinates.
    **In these cases, structured loading can be used with confidence.**

  * Ordinary Fieldsfiles (i.e. model outputs) are generally suitable for
    structured loading.  Many PP files also are, especially if produced
    directly from Fieldsfiles, and retaining the same field ordering.

  * Some inputs however (generally PP) will be unsuitable for structured
    loading :  For instance if a particular combination of vertical levels and
    time has been omitted, or some fields appear out of order.

  * There are also some known unsupported cases, including data which is
    produced on pseudo-levels.  See the detail documentation on this.

  It is the user's responsibility to use structured loading only with suitable
  inputs.  Otherwise, odd behaviour and even incorrect loading can result, as
  input files are not checked as fully as in a normal load.

  Although the user loading call for structured loading can be just the same,
  and the returned results are also often identical, structured loading is not
  in fact an exact *identical* replacement for normal loading:

  *  results are often somewhat different, especially regarding the order
     of dimensions and the choice of dimension coordinates.

  *  although both constraints and user callbacks are supported, callback
     routines will generally need to be re-written.  This is because a
     'raw' cube in structured loading generally covers *multiple* PPfields,
     which therefore need to be handled as a collection :  A grouping object
     containing them is passed to the callback 'field' argument.
     An example showing callbacks suitable for both normal and structured
     loading can be seen `here <https://github.com/pp-mo/iris/blob/9042b4217ab6dd78dcfccfec19584170a5a6250a/lib/iris/tests/integration/fast_load/test_fast_load.py#L409>`_.

  For full details, see : :meth:`iris.fileformats.um.structured_um_loading`.


* A skip pattern is introduced to the fields file loader, such that fields
  which cannot be turned into iris PPField instances are skipped and the
  remaining fields are loaded.  This especially applies to certain types of
  files that can contain fields with a non-standard LBREL value : Iris can now
  load such a file, skipping the unreadable field and printing a warning
  message.

* Iris can now load PP files containing a PP field whose LBLREC value does not
  match the field length recorded in the file.
  A warning message is printed, and all fields up to the offending one are
  loaded and returned.
  Previously, this simply resulted in an unrecoverable error.

* The transpose method of a Cube now results in a lazy transposed view of the original rather than realising the data then transposing it.

* The :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights` function is now more accurate for single precision input bounds.

Deprecations
============
* The module :mod:`iris.experimental.fieldsfile` has been deprecated, in favour
  of the new fast-loading mechanism provided by
  :meth:`iris.fileformats.um.structured_um_loading`.

Documentation Changes
=====================
* Corrected documentation of :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` scheme to make the usage scope clearer.
