What's new in Iris 1.2
**********************

:Release: 1.2.0
:Date: unreleased

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.2.

Iris 1.2 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.2:

* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.convert_units()` and
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.convert_units()` have been added. This is
  aimed at simplifying the conversion of a cube or coordinate from one unit to
  another. For example, to convert a cube in kelvin to celsius, one can now
  call cube.convert_units('celsius'). The operation is in-place and if the
  units are not convertible an exception will be raised.
* :attr:`iris.cube.Cube.var_name`, :attr:`iris.coords.Coord.var_name` and
  :attr:`iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory.var_name` attributes have been added.
  This attribute represents the CF variable name of the object. It is populated
  when loading from CF-netCDF files and is used when writing to CF-netCDF. A
  var_name keyword argument has also been added to the
  :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.coord()`, :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.coords()` and
  :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.aux_factory()` methods.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.is_compatible()` has been added. This method is
  used to determine whether two coordinates are sufficiently alike to
  allow operations such as :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.intersect()` and
  :func:`iris.analysis.interpolate.regrid()` to take place. A corresponding
  method for cubes, :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.is_compatible()`, has also been
  added.
* Printing a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` is now more user friendly with regards 
  to dates and time. All *time* and *forecast_reference_time* scalar coordinates
  now display human readable date/time information.
* The units of a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` are now shown when it is printed.
* The area weights calculated by :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights`
  may now be normalised relative to the total grid area.
* Weights may now be passed to :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.rolling_window` aggregations,
  thus allowing arbitrary digital filters to be applied to a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube`.

Bugs fixed
----------
* The GRIB hindcast interpretation of negative forecast times can be enabled
  via the :data:`iris.fileformats.grib.hindcast_workaround` flag.
* The NIMROD file loader has been extended to cope with orography vertical
  coordinates.

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* The deprecated :attr:`iris.cube.Cube.unit` and :attr:`iris.coords.Coord.unit`
  attributes have been removed.

Deprecations
------------
* The :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.unit_converted()` method has been deprecated.
  Users should make a copy of the coordinate using
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.copy()` and then call the
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.convert_units()` method of the new coordinate.
* With the addition of the var_name attribute the signatures of DimCoord and
  AuxCoord have changed. This should have no impact if you are providing
  parameters as keyword arguments, but it may cause issues if you are relying
  on the position/order of the arguments.
* Iteration over a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` has been deprecated. Instead,
  users should use :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices`.




