What's new in Iris 1.3
**********************

:Release: 1.3.0
:Date: 27 March 2013

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.3.

Iris 1.3 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.3:

* Experimental support for
  :ref:`loading ABF/ABL files<whats-new-abf>`.
* Support in :func:`iris.analysis.interpolate.linear` for longitude ranges
  other than [-180, 180].
* Support for :ref:`customised CF profiles<whats-new-cf-profile>` on
  export to netCDF.
* The documentation now includes guidance on
  :ref:`how to cite Iris<Citing_Iris>`.
* The ability to calculate the exponential of a Cube, via
  :func:`iris.analysis.maths.exp()`.
* Experimental support for :ref:`concatenating Cubes<whats-new-concat>`
  along existing dimensions via
  :func:`iris.experimental.concatenate.concatenate()`.

Bugs fixed
----------
* Printing a Cube now supports Unicode attribute values.
* PP export now sets LBMIN correctly.
* Converting between reference times now works correctly for
  units with non-Gregorian calendars.
* Slicing a :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` now returns a
  :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` instead of a normal list.

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* N/A

Deprecations
------------
* The boolean methods/properties on the :class:`~iris.unit.Unit` class
  have been updated to `is_...()` methods, in line with the project's
  naming conventions.

  ====================================== ===========================================
  Deprecated property/method             New method
  ====================================== ===========================================
  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.convertible()`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_convertible()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.dimensionless`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_dimensionless()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.no_unit`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_no_unit()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.time_reference` :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_time_reference()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.unknown`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_unknown()`
  ====================================== ===========================================


.. _whats-new-abf:

Loading ABF/ABL files
=====================

Support for the ABF and ABL file formats (as
`defined <http://cliveg.bu.edu/modismisr/lai3g-fpar3g.html>`_ by the
climate and vegetation research group of Boston University), is
currently provided under the "experimental" system. As such, ABF/ABL
file detection is not automatically enabled.

To enable ABF/ABL file detection, simply import the
:mod:`iris.experimental.fileformats.abf` module before attempting to
load an ABF/ABL file.

For example::

        import iris.experimental.fileformats.abf
        cube = iris.load_cube('/path/to/my/data.abf')


.. _whats-new-cf-profile:

Customised CF profiles
======================

Iris now provides hooks in the CF-netCDF export process to allow
user-defined routines to check and/or modify the representation in the
netCDF file.

The following keys within the ``iris.site_configuration`` dictionary have
been **reserved** as hooks to *external* user-defined CF profile functions:

 * ``cf_profile`` injests a :class:`iris.cube.Cube` for analysis and returns a profile result
 * ``cf_patch`` modifies the CF-netCDF file associated with export of the :class:`iris.cube.Cube`

The ``iris.site_configuration`` dictionary should be configured via the ``iris/site_config.py`` file.

For further implementation details see ``iris/fileformats/netcdf.py``.


.. _whats-new-concat:

Cube concatenation
==================

Iris now provides initial support for concatenating Cubes along one or
more existing dimensions. Currently this will force the data to be
loaded for all the source Cubes, but future work will remove this
restriction.

For example, if one began with a collection of Cubes, each containing
data for a different range of times::

        >>> print cubes
        0: air_temperature                     (time: 30; latitude: 145; longitude: 192)
        1: air_temperature                     (time: 30; latitude: 145; longitude: 192)
        2: air_temperature                     (time: 30; latitude: 145; longitude: 192)

One could use :func:`iris.experimental.concatenate.concatenate()` to
combine these into a single Cube as follows::

        >>> new_cubes = iris.experimental.concatenate.concatenate(cubes)
        >>> print new_cubes
        0: air_temperature                     (time: 90; latitude: 145; longitude: 192)

.. note::

    As this is an experimental feature, your feedback is especially welcome.

