docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.4.rst, before:

What's new in Iris 1.4
**********************

:Release: 1.4.0
:Date: unreleased

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.4.

Iris 1.4 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.4:

* A new configuration variable called :data:`iris.config.TEST_DATA_DIR`
  has been added, replacing the previous combination of
  :data:`iris.config.MASTER_DATA_REPOSITORY` and
  :data:`iris.config.DATA_REPOSITORY`. This constant should be the path
  to a directory containing the test data required by the unit tests. It can
  be set by adding a ``test_data_dir`` entry to the ``Resources`` section of
  ``site.cfg``. See :mod:`iris.config` for more details.
* One and two dimensional cubes can be converted to and from Pandas objects.
  See :mod:`iris.pandas` for more details.
* Experimental support has been added to :func:`iris.load`,
  :func:`iris.load_cube` and :func:`iris.load_cubes` for loading Cubes from
  OPeNDAP URLs.
* :func:`iris.experimental.raster.export_geotiff` now provides experimental
  GeoTiff export functionality.

Bugs fixed
----------
* N/A

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* As part of simplifying the mechanism for accessing test data
  :func:`iris.io.select_data_path`, :data:`iris.config.DATA_REPOSITORY`,
  :data:`iris.config.MASTER_DATA_REPOSITORY` and
  :data:`iris.config.RESOURCE_DIR` have been removed.

Deprecations
------------
* N/A

Commit message:

Revised grib load+save: extra levels translation, and grib <-> cf phenomenon translation from metadata project.

docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.4.rst, after:

What's new in Iris 1.4
**********************

:Release: 1.4.0
:Date: unreleased

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.4.

Iris 1.4 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.4:

* A new configuration variable called :data:`iris.config.TEST_DATA_DIR`
  has been added, replacing the previous combination of
  :data:`iris.config.MASTER_DATA_REPOSITORY` and
  :data:`iris.config.DATA_REPOSITORY`. This constant should be the path
  to a directory containing the test data required by the unit tests. It can
  be set by adding a ``test_data_dir`` entry to the ``Resources`` section of
  ``site.cfg``. See :mod:`iris.config` for more details.
* One and two dimensional cubes can be converted to and from Pandas objects.
  See :mod:`iris.pandas` for more details.
* Experimental support has been added to :func:`iris.load`,
  :func:`iris.load_cube` and :func:`iris.load_cubes` for loading Cubes from
  OPeNDAP URLs.
* :func:`iris.experimental.raster.export_geotiff` now provides experimental
  GeoTiff export functionality.
* Cubes with no vertical coordinate can now be output to Grib format. In these
  cases, "Type of first fixed surface" is set to 1, "ground or water surface".
  ( This is a common usage for data with no defined level, but may not be
  strictly correct - see https://github.com/SciTools/iris/issues/519 ).

Bugs fixed
----------
* N/A

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* As part of simplifying the mechanism for accessing test data
  :func:`iris.io.select_data_path`, :data:`iris.config.DATA_REPOSITORY`,
  :data:`iris.config.MASTER_DATA_REPOSITORY` and
  :data:`iris.config.RESOURCE_DIR` have been removed.

Deprecations
------------
* N/A
