docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.5.rst, before:

What's new in Iris 1.5
**********************

:Release: 1.5.0
:Date: unreleased

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.5.

Iris 1.5 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.5:

* Scatter plots can now be produced using :func:`iris.plot.scatter` and
  :func:`iris.quickplot.scatter`.
* The functions :func:`iris.plot.plot` and :func:`iris.quickplot.plot` now take
  up to two arguments, which may be cubes or coordinates, allowing the user to
  have full control over what is plotted on each axis. The coords keyword argument
  is now deprecated for these functions.
* class:`iris.analysis.SUM` is now a weighted aggregator, allowing it to take a
  weights keyword argument.
* Grib2 translations added for standard_name 'soil_temperature'.

Bugs fixed
----------
* N/A

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* N/A

Deprecations
------------
* The coords keyword argument for :func:`iris.plot.plot` and :func:`iris.quickplot.plot`
  has been deprecated due to the new API which accepts multiple cubes or coordinates.

Commit message:

BF - Correct Earth radius interpretation for GRIB, fixes #690.

docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.5.rst, after:

What's new in Iris 1.5
**********************

:Release: 1.5.0
:Date: unreleased

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.5.

Iris 1.5 features
=================

A summary of the main features added with version 1.5:

* Scatter plots can now be produced using :func:`iris.plot.scatter` and
  :func:`iris.quickplot.scatter`.
* The functions :func:`iris.plot.plot` and :func:`iris.quickplot.plot` now take
  up to two arguments, which may be cubes or coordinates, allowing the user to
  have full control over what is plotted on each axis. The coords keyword argument
  is now deprecated for these functions.
* class:`iris.analysis.SUM` is now a weighted aggregator, allowing it to take a
  weights keyword argument.
* Grib2 translations added for standard_name 'soil_temperature'.

Bugs fixed
----------
* Shape of the Earth scale factors are now correctly interpreted by the GRIB
  loader. They were previously used as a multiplier for the given value but
  should have been used as a decimal shift.

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* N/A

Deprecations
------------
* The coords keyword argument for :func:`iris.plot.plot` and :func:`iris.quickplot.plot`
  has been deprecated due to the new API which accepts multiple cubes or coordinates.
