docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.6.rst, before:

What's new in Iris 1.6
**********************

:Release: 1.6.0
:Date: unreleased

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* The previously experimental 'concatenate' function is now a method of a
  :class:`iris.cube.CubeList`, see :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate`.  The
  functionality is unchanged.

Iris 1.6 features
=================
* A new utility function makes it easy to "shortcut" slow calculations or
  file loads by caching stored results. See
  :meth:`iris.util.file_is_newer_than`.
* A new experimental function removes any non-matching attributes from a group
  of cubes.  This can assist in merging cubes which only differ in their
  attributes.  See
  :meth:`iris.experimental.equalise_cubes.equalise_attributes`.
* Staggered grid support for Fieldsfiles extended to type 6 (Arakawa C grid
  with v at poles).

Bugs fixed
----------
* N/A

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract_by_trajectory()` has been removed.
  Instead, use :func:`iris.analysis.trajectory.interpolate()`.
* :func:`iris.load_strict()` has been removed.
  Code should now use the :func:`iris.load_cube()` and
  :func:`iris.load_cubes()` functions instead.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cos()` and :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.sin()`
  have been removed.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.unit_converted()` has been removed.
  Instead, make a copy of the coordinate using
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.copy()` and then call the
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.convert_units()` method of the new
  coordinate.
* Iteration over a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` has been removed. Instead,
  use :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices()`.
* The following boolean methods/properties on the
  :class:`~iris.unit.Unit` class have been removed.

  ====================================== ===========================================
  Removed property/method                New method
  ====================================== ===========================================
  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.convertible()`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_convertible()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.dimensionless`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_dimensionless()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.no_unit`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_no_unit()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.time_reference` :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_time_reference()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.unknown`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_unknown()`
  ====================================== ===========================================
* As a result of deprecating :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` and removing the
  automatic appending of history by operations such as cube arithmatic,
  collapsing, and aggregating, the signatures of a number of functions within
  :mod:`iris.analysis.maths` have been modified along with that of
  :class:`iris.analysis.Aggregator` and :class:`iris.analysis.WeightedAggregator`.

Deprecations
------------
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` has been deprecated in favour
  of users modifying/creating the history metadata directly. This is
  because the automatic behaviour did not deliver a sufficiently complete,
  auditable history and often prevented the merging of cubes.

Commit message:

ENH: Scalar coord promotion util.

docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.6.rst, after:

What's new in Iris 1.6
**********************

:Release: 1.6.0
:Date: unreleased

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* The previously experimental 'concatenate' function is now a method of a
  :class:`iris.cube.CubeList`, see :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate`.  The
  functionality is unchanged.

Iris 1.6 features
=================
* A new utility function makes it easy to "shortcut" slow calculations or
  file loads by caching stored results. See
  :func:`iris.util.file_is_newer_than`.
* A new experimental function removes any non-matching attributes from a group
  of cubes.  This can assist in merging cubes which only differ in their
  attributes.  See
  :meth:`iris.experimental.equalise_cubes.equalise_attributes`.
* Staggered grid support for Fieldsfiles extended to type 6 (Arakawa C grid
  with v at poles).
* A new utility function is now available for creating a new cube axis as the
  leading dimension and in doing so, promoting a scalar coordinate if
  specified.  See
  :func:`iris.util.new_axis`.

Bugs fixed
----------
* N/A

Incompatible changes
--------------------
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract_by_trajectory()` has been removed.
  Instead, use :func:`iris.analysis.trajectory.interpolate()`.
* :func:`iris.load_strict()` has been removed.
  Code should now use the :func:`iris.load_cube()` and
  :func:`iris.load_cubes()` functions instead.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cos()` and :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.sin()`
  have been removed.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.unit_converted()` has been removed.
  Instead, make a copy of the coordinate using
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.copy()` and then call the
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.convert_units()` method of the new
  coordinate.
* Iteration over a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` has been removed. Instead,
  use :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices()`.
* The following boolean methods/properties on the
  :class:`~iris.unit.Unit` class have been removed.

  ====================================== ===========================================
  Removed property/method                New method
  ====================================== ===========================================
  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.convertible()`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_convertible()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.dimensionless`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_dimensionless()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.no_unit`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_no_unit()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.time_reference` :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_time_reference()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.unknown`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_unknown()`
  ====================================== ===========================================
* As a result of deprecating :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` and removing the
  automatic appending of history by operations such as cube arithmatic,
  collapsing, and aggregating, the signatures of a number of functions within
  :mod:`iris.analysis.maths` have been modified along with that of
  :class:`iris.analysis.Aggregator` and :class:`iris.analysis.WeightedAggregator`.

Deprecations
------------
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` has been deprecated in favour
  of users modifying/creating the history metadata directly. This is
  because the automatic behaviour did not deliver a sufficiently complete,
  auditable history and often prevented the merging of cubes.
