What's new in Iris 1.6
**********************

:Release: 1.6.0
:Date: 23rd January 2014

Iris 1.6 features
=================

.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Showcase Feature - Back to the future ...

    The new :data:`iris.FUTURE` global variable is a :class:`iris.Future`
    instance that controls the run-time behaviour of Iris.

    By setting :data:`iris.FUTURE.cell_datetime_objects` to *True*, a *time*
    reference coordinate will return *datetime-like* objects when invoked
    with :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cell` or :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cells`.

    .. code-block:: python

        >>> from iris.coords import DimCoord
        >>> iris.FUTURE.cell_datetime_objects = True
        >>> coord = DimCoord([1, 2, 3], 'time', units='hours since epoch')
        >>> print [str(cell) for cell in coord.cells()]
        ['1970-01-01 01:00:00', '1970-01-01 02:00:00', '1970-01-01 03:00:00']

    Note that, either a :class:`datetime.datetime` or :class:`netcdftime.datetime`
    object instance will be returned, depending on the calendar of the time
    reference coordinate.

    This capability permits the ability to express time constraints more
    naturally when the cell represents a *datetime-like* object.

    .. code-block:: python

        # Ignore the 1st of January.
        iris.Constraint(time=lambda cell: cell.point.month != 1 and cell.point.day != 1)

    Note that, :class:`iris.Future` also supports a `context manager <http://docs.python.org/2/reference/datamodel.html#context-managers>`_
    which allows multiple sections of code to execute with different run-time behaviour.

    .. code-block:: python

        >>> print iris.FUTURE
        Future(cell_datetime_objects=False)
        >>> with iris.FUTURE.context(cell_datetime_objects=True):
        ...     # Code that expects to deal with datetime-like objects.
        ...     print iris.FUTURE
        ...
        Future(cell_datetime_objects=True)
        >>> print iris.FUTURE
        Future(cell_datetime_objects=False)

.. admonition:: Showcase Feature - Partial date/time ...

    The :class:`iris.time.PartialDateTime` class provides the ability to perform
    comparisons with other *datetime-like* objects such as
    :class:`datetime.datetime` or :class:`netcdftime.datetime`.

    The *year, month, day, hour, minute, second* and *microsecond* attributes of
    a :class:`iris.time.PartialDateTime` object may be fully or partially specified
    for any given comparison.

    This is particularly useful for time based constraints, whilst enabling the
    :data:`iris.FUTURE.cell_datetime_objects`, see :ref:`here <showcase>` for further
    details on this new release feature.

    .. code-block:: python

        from iris.time import PartialDateTime

        # Ignore the 1st of January.
        iris.Constraint(time=lambda cell: cell != PartialDateTime(month=1, day=1))

	# Constrain by a specific year.
	iris.Constraint(time=PartialDateTime(year=2013))

    Also see the User Guide :ref:`Constraining on Time <using-time-constraints>`
    section for further commentary.

* GRIB loading supports latitude/longitude or Gaussian reduced grids for
  version 1 and version 2.
* :ref:`A new utility function to assist with caching<caching>`.
* :ref:`The RMS aggregator supports weights<rms>`.
* :ref:`A new experimental function to equalise cube attributes<equalise>`.
* :ref:`Collapsing a cube provides a tolerance level for missing-data<tolerance>`.
* NAME loading supports vertical coordinates.
* UM land/sea mask de-compression for Fieldsfiles and PP files.
* Lateral boundary condition Fieldsfile support.
* Staggered grid support for Fieldsfiles extended to type 6 (Arakawa C grid
  with v at poles).
* Extend support for Fieldsfiles with grid codes 11, 26, 27, 28 and 29.
* :ref:`Promoting a scalar coordinate to new leading cube dimension<promote>`.
* Interpreting cell methods from NAME.
* GRIB2 export without forecast_period, enabling NAME to GRIB2. 
* Loading height levels from GRIB2.
* :func:`iris.coord_categorisation.add_categorised_coord` now supports
  multi-dimensional coordinate categorisation.
* Fieldsfiles and PP support for loading and saving of air potential temperature.
* :func:`iris.experimental.regrid.regrid_weighted_curvilinear_to_rectilinear`
  regrids curvilinear point data to a target rectilinear grid using associated
  area weights.
* Extended capability of the NetCDF saver :meth:`iris.fileformats.netcdf.Saver.write`
  for fine-tune control of a :mod:`netCDF4.Variable`. Also allows multiple dimensions
  to be nominated as *unlimited*.
* :ref:`A new PEAK aggregator providing spline interpolation<peak>`.
* A new utility function :func:`iris.util.broadcast_to_shape`.
* A new utility function :func:`iris.util.as_compatible_shape`.
* Iris tests can now be run on systems where directory write permissions
  previously did not allow it.  This is achieved by writing to the current working
  directory in such cases.
* Support for 365 day calendar PP fields.
* Added phenomenon translation between cf and grib2 for wind (from) direction.
* PP files now retain lbfc value on save, derived from the stash attribute.

Bugs fixed
==========
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.rolling_window` has been extended to support masked arrays.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.collapsed` now handles string coordinates.
* Default LBUSER(2) to -99 for Fieldsfile and PP saving.
* :func:`iris.util.monotonic` returns the correct direction.
* File loaders correctly parse filenames containing colons.
* ABF loader now correctly loads the ABF data payload once.
* Support for 1D array :data:`iris.cube.cube.attributes`.
* GRIB bounded level saving fix.
* :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.project` now associates a coordinate system
  with the resulting target cube, where applicable.
* :func:`iris.util.array_equal` now correctly ignores any mask if present,
  matching the behaviour of :func:`numpy.array_equal` except with string array
  support.
* :func:`iris.analysis.interpolate.linear` now retains a mask in the resulting
  cube.
* :meth:`iris.coords.DimCoord.from_regular` now correctly returns a coordinate
  which will always be regular as indicated by :func:`~iris.util.is_regular`.
* :func:`iris.util.rolling_window` handling of masked arrays (degenerate
  masks) fixed.
* Exception no longer raised for any ellipsoid definition in nimrod loading.

Incompatible changes
====================
* The experimental 'concatenate' function is now a method of a
  :class:`iris.cube.CubeList`, see :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate`. The
  functionality is unchanged.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract_by_trajectory()` has been removed.
  Instead, use :func:`iris.analysis.trajectory.interpolate()`.
* :func:`iris.load_strict()` has been removed.
  Instead, use :func:`iris.load_cube()` and :func:`iris.load_cubes()`.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.cos()` and :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.sin()`
  have been removed.
* :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.unit_converted()` has been removed.
  Instead, make a copy of the coordinate using
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.copy()` and then call the
  :meth:`iris.coords.Coord.convert_units()` method of the new
  coordinate.
* Iteration over a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` has been removed. Instead,
  use :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices()`.
* The following :class:`~iris.unit.Unit` deprecated methods/properties have been removed.

  ====================================== ===========================================
  Removed property/method                New method
  ====================================== ===========================================
  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.convertible()`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_convertible()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.dimensionless`  :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_dimensionless()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.no_unit`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_no_unit()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.time_reference` :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_time_reference()`
  :attr:`~iris.unit.Unit.unknown`        :meth:`~iris.unit.Unit.is_unknown()`
  ====================================== ===========================================
* As a result of deprecating :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` and removing the
  automatic appending of history by operations such as cube arithmetic,
  collapsing, and aggregating, the signatures of a number of functions within
  :mod:`iris.analysis.maths` have been modified along with that of
  :class:`iris.analysis.Aggregator` and :class:`iris.analysis.WeightedAggregator`.
* The experimental ABF and ABL functionality has now been promoted to 
  core functionality in :mod:`iris.fileformats.abf`.
* The following :mod:`iris.coord_categorisation` deprecated functions have been
  removed.

  =============================================================== =======================================================
  Removed function                                                New function
  =============================================================== =======================================================
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_custom_season`            :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_custom_season_number`     :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season_number`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_custom_season_year`       :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season_year`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_custom_season_membership` :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season_membership`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_month_shortname`          :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_month`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_weekday_shortname`        :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_weekday`
  :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season_month_initials`    :func:`~iris.coord_categorisation.add_season`
  =============================================================== =======================================================

Deprecations
============
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.add_history` has been deprecated in favour
  of users modifying/creating the history metadata directly. This is
  because the automatic behaviour did not deliver a sufficiently complete,
  auditable history and often prevented the merging of cubes.
* :func:`iris.util.broadcast_weights` has been deprecated and replaced
  by the new utility function :func:`iris.util.broadcast_to_shape`.
* Callback mechanism `iris.run_callback` has had its deprecation of return
  values revoked.  The callback can now return cube instances as well as
  inplace changes to the cube.

New Contributors
================
Congratulations and thank you to `felicityguest <https://github.com/felicityguest>`_, `jkettleb <https://github.com/jkettleb>`_,
`kwilliams-mo <https://github.com/kwilliams-mo>`_ and `shoyer <https://github.com/shoyer>`_ who all made their first contribution
to Iris!


----


.. _caching:

A new utility function to assist with caching
---------------------------------------------
To assist with management of caching results to file, the new utility
function :func:`iris.util.file_is_newer_than` may be used to easily determine whether
the modification time of a specified cache file is newer than one or more other files.

Typically, the use of caching is a means to circumvent the cost of repeating time
consuming processing, or to reap the benefit of fast-loading a pickled cube.

.. code-block:: python

    # Determine whether to load from the cache or source.
    if iris.util.file_is_newer(cache_file, source_file):
        with open(cache_file, 'rb') as fh:
            cube = cPickle.load(fh)
    else:
        cube = iris.load_cube(source_file)
	
	# Perhaps perform some intensive processing ...

        # Create the cube cache.
        with open(cache_file, 'wb') as fh:
            cPickle.dump(cube, fh)


.. _rms:

The RPM aggregator supports weights
===================================
A :data:`iris.analysis.RMS` aggregator has been extended to allow the use of
weights using the new keyword argument :data:`weights`.

For example, a RMS weighted cube collapse is performed as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    from iris.analysis import RMS
    collapsed_cube = cube.collapsed('height', RMS, weights=weights)


.. _equalise:

Equalise cube attributes
========================
To assist with :class:`iris.cube.Cube` merging, the new experimental in-place
function :func:`iris.experimental.equalise_cubes.equalise_attributes` ensures
that a sequence of cubes contains a common set of :data:`iris.cube.Cube.attributes`.

This attempts to smooth the merging process by ensuring that all candidate cubes
have the same attributes.


.. _tolerance:

Masking a collapsed result by missing-data tolerance
====================================================
The result from collapsing masked cube data may now be completely
masked by providing a :data:`mdtol` missing-data tolerance keyword
to :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.collapsed`.

This tolerance provides a threshold that will **completely** mask the
collapsed result whenever the fraction of data to missing-data is 
less than or equal to the provided tolerance.


.. _promote:

Promote a scalar coordinate
===========================
The new utility function :func:`iris.util.new_axis` creates a new cube with
a new leading dimension of size unity. If a scalar coordinate is provided, then
the scalar coordinate is promoted to be the dimension coordinate for the new
leading dimension.

Note that, this function will load the data payload of the cube.


.. _peak:

A new PEAK aggregator providing spline interpolation
====================================================
The new :data:`iris.analysis.PEAK` aggregator calculates the global peak
value from a spline interpolation of the :class:`iris.cube.Cube` data payload
along a nominated coordinate axis.

For example, to calculate the peak time:

.. code-block:: python

    from iris.analysis import PEAK
    collapsed_cube = cube.collapsed('time', PEAK)
