What's new in Iris 1.7
**********************

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.7.
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

:Release: 1.7.4
:Date: 15th April 2015

Iris 1.7 features
=================

.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Showcase: Iris is making use of Biggus

    Iris is now making extensive use of `Biggus <https://github.com/SciTools/biggus>`_
    for virtual arrays and lazy array evaluation. In practice this means that analyses
    of cubes with data bigger than the available system memory are now possible.

    Other than the improved functionality the changes are mostly
    transparent; for example, before the introduction of biggus, MemoryErrors
    were likely for very large datasets::

        >>> result = extremely_large_cube.collapsed('time', iris.analyis.MEAN)
        MemoryError

    Now, for supported operations, the evaluation is lazy (i.e. it doesn't take
    place until the actual data is subsequently requested) and can handle data
    larger than available system memory::

        >>> result = extremely_large_cube.collapsed('time', iris.analyis.MEAN)
        >>> print type(result)
        <class 'iris.cube.Cube'>

    Memory is still a limiting factor if ever the data is desired as a NumPy array
    (e.g. via :data:`cube.data <iris.cube.Cube.data>`), but additional methods have
    been added to the Cube to support querying and subsequently accessing the "lazy"
    data form (see :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.has_lazy_data` and
    :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.lazy_data`).

.. admonition:: Showcase: New interpolation and regridding API

    New interpolation and regridding interfaces have been added which simplify and
    extend the existing functionality.

    The interfaces are exposed on the cube in the form of the
    :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` and :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.regrid` methods.
    Conceptually the signatures of the methods are::

        interpolated_cube = cube.interpolate(interpolation_points, interpolation_scheme)

    and::

        regridded_cube = cube.regrid(target_grid_cube, regridding_scheme)

    Whilst not all schemes have been migrated to the new interface,
    :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` defines both linear interpolation and regridding,
    and :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` defines an area weighted regridding
    scheme.

.. admonition:: Showcase: Merge and concatenate reporting

    Merge reporting is designed as an aid to the merge processes. Should merging
    a :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` fail, merge reporting means that a descriptive
    error will be raised that details the differences between the cubes in the
    :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` that prevented the merge from being successful.

    A new :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` method, called
    :meth:`~iris.cube.CubeList.merge_cube`, has been introduced. Calling it on a
    :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` will result in a single merged
    :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` being returned or an error message being raised
    that describes why the merge process failed.

    The following example demonstrates the error message that describes a merge
    failure caused by cubes having differing attributes::

        >>> cube_list = iris.cube.CubeList((c1, c2))
        >>> cube_list.merge_cube()
        Traceback (most recent call last):
            ...
            raise iris.exceptions.MergeError(msgs)
        iris.exceptions.MergeError: failed to merge into a single cube.
          cube.attributes keys differ: 'foo'

    The naming of this new method mirrors that of Iris load functions, where
    one would always expect a :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` from :func:`iris.load`
    and a :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` from :func:`iris.load_cube`.

    Concatenate reporting is the equivalent process for concatenating a
    :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList`. It is accessed through the method 
    :meth:`~iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate_cube`, which will return a single
    concatenated cube or produce an error message that describes why the
    concatenate process failed.

.. admonition:: Showcase: Cube broadcasting

    When performing cube arithmetic, cubes now follow similar broadcasting rules
    as NumPy arrays.

    However, the additional richness of Iris coordinate meta-data provides an
    enhanced capability beyond the basic broadcasting behaviour of NumPy.

    This means that when performing cube arithmetic, the dimensionality and shape of
    cubes no longer need to match. For example, if the dimensionality of a cube is
    reduced by collapsing, then the result can be used to subtract from the original
    cube to calculate an anomaly::

        >>> time_mean = original_cube.collapsed('time', iris.analysis.MEAN)
        >>> mean_anomaly = original_cube - time_mean

    Given both broadcasting **and** coordinate meta-data, Iris can now perform
    arithmetic with cubes that have similar but not identical shape::

        >>> similar_cube = original_cube.copy()
        >>> similar_cube.transpose()
        >>> zero_cube = original_cube - similar_cube

* Merge reporting that raises a descriptive error if the merge process fails.
* Linear interpolation and regridding now make use of SciPy's RegularGridInterpolator
  for much faster linear interpolation.
* NAME file loading now handles the "no time averaging" column and translates
  height/altitude above ground/sea-level columns into appropriate coordinate metadata.
* The NetCDF saver has been extended to allow saving of cubes with hybrid pressure
  auxiliary factories.
* PP/FF loading supports LBLEV of 9999.
* Extended GRIB1 loading to support data on hybrid pressure levels.
* :func:`iris.coord_categorisation.add_day_of_year` can be used to add categorised
  day of year coordinates based on time coordinates with non-Gregorian calendars.
* Support for loading data on reduced grids from GRIB files in raw form without
  automatically interpolating to a regular grid.
* The coordinate systems :class:`iris.coord_systems.Orthographic` and
  :class:`iris.coord_systems.VerticalPerspective` (for imagery from geostationary
  satellites) have been added.
* Extended NetCDF loading to support the "ocean sigma over z" auxiliary coordinate
  factory.
* Support added for loading CF-NetCDF data with bounds arrays that are missing a
  vertex dimension.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.rolling_window` can now be used with string-based
  :class:`iris.coords.AuxCoord` instances.
* Loading of PP and FF files has been optimised through deferring creation of
  PPField attributes.
* Automatic association of a coordinate's CF formula terms variable with the
  data variable associated with that coordinate.
* PP loading translates cross-section height into a dimensional auxiliary coordinate.
* String auxiliary coordinates can now be plotted with the Iris plotting wrappers.
* :func:`iris.analysis.geometry.geometry_area_weights` now allows for the calculation of
  normalized cell weights.
* Many new translations between the CF spec and STASH codes or GRIB2 parameter codes.
* PP save rules add the data's UM Version to the attributes of the  saved file
  when appropriate.
* NetCDF reference surface variable promotion available through the
  :class:`iris.FUTURE` mechanism.
* A speed improvement in calculation of :func:`iris.analysis.geometry.geometry_area_weights`.
* The mdtol keyword was added to area-weighted regridding to allow control of the
  tolerance for missing data. For a further description of this concept, see
  :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted`.
* Handling for patching of the CF conventions global attribute via a defined
  cf_patch_conventions function.
* Deferred GRIB data loading has been introduced for reduced memory consumption when
  loading GRIB files.
* Concatenate reporting that raises a descriptive error if the concatenation
  process fails.
* A speed improvement when loading PP or FF data and constraining on STASH code.

Bugs fixed
==========
* Data containing more than one reference cube for constructing hybrid height
  coordinates can now be loaded.
* Removed cause of increased margin of error when interpolating.
* Changed floating-point precision used when wrapping points for interpolation.
* Mappables that can be used to generate colorbars are now returned by Iris
  plotting wrappers.
* NetCDF load ignores over-specified formula terms on bounded dimensionless vertical
  coordinates.
* Auxiliary coordinate factory loading now correctly interprets formula term
  varibles for "atmosphere hybrid sigma pressure" coordinate data.
* Corrected comparison of NumPy NaN values in cube merge process.
* Fixes for :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.intersection` to correct calculating the intersection
  of a cube with split bounds, handling of circular coordinates, handling of
  monotonically descending bounded coordinats and for finding a wrapped two-point
  result and longitude tolerances.
* A bug affecting :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.extract` and :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.extract`
  that led to unexpected behaviour when operating on scalar cubes has been fixed.
* Aggregate_by may now be passed single-value coordinates.
* Making a copy of a :class:`iris.coords.DimCoord` no longer results in the writeable
  flag on the copied points and bounds arrays being set to True.
* Can now save to PP a cube that has vertical levels but no orography.
* Fix a bug causing surface altitude and surface pressure fields to not appear
  in cubes loaded with a STASH constraint.
* Fixed support for :class:`iris.fileformats.pp.STASH` objects in STASH constraints.
* A fix to avoid a problem where cube attribute names clash with NetCDF reserved attribute names.
* A fix to allow :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate` to deal with descending coordinate order.
* Add missing NetCDF attribute `varname` when constructing a new :class:`iris.coords.AuxCoord`.
* The datatype of time arrays converted with :func:`iris.util.unify_time_units` is now preserved.

Bugs fixed in v1.7.3
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* Scalar dimension coordinates can now be concatenated with :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate`.
* Arbitrary names can no longer be set for elements of a :class:`iris.fileformats.pp.SplittableInt`.
* Cubes that contain a pseudo-level coordinate can now be saved to PP.
* Fixed a bug in the FieldsFile loader that prevented it always loading all available fields.

Bugs fixed in v1.7.4
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* :meth:`Coord.guess_bounds` can now deal with circular coordinates.
* :meth:`Coord.nearest_neighbour_index` can now work with descending bounds.
* Passing `weights` to :meth:`Cube.rolling_window` no longer prevents other
  keyword arguments from being passed to the aggregator.
* Several minor fixes to allow use of Iris on Windows.
* Made use of the new standard_parallels keyword in Cartopy's LambertConformal
  projection (Cartopy v0.12). Older versions of Iris will not be able to
  create LambertConformal coordinate systems with Cartopy >= 0.12.

Incompatible changes
====================
* Saving a cube with a STASH attribute to NetCDF now produces a variable
  with an attribute of "um_stash_source" rather than "ukmo__um_stash_source".
* Cubes saved to NetCDF with a coordinate system referencing a spherical ellipsoid
  now result in the grid mapping variable containing only the "earth_radius" attribute,
  rather than the "semi_major_axis" and "semi_minor_axis".
* Collapsing a cube over all of its dimensions now results in a scalar cube rather
  than a 1d cube.

Deprecations
============
* :func:`iris.util.ensure_array` has been deprecated.
* Deprecated the :func:`iris.fileformats.pp.reset_load_rules` and
  :func:`iris.fileformats.grib.reset_load_rules` functions.
* Matplotlib is no longer a core Iris dependency.

Documentation Changes
=====================
* New sections on :ref:`cube broadcasting <cube-maths_anomaly>` and
  :doc:`regridding and interpolation </userguide/interpolation_and_regridding>`
  have been added to the :doc:`user guide </userguide/index>`.
* An example demonstrating custom log-scale colouring has been added.
  See :ref:`General-anomaly_log_colouring`.
* An example demonstrating the creation of a custom
  :class:`iris.analysis.Aggregator` has been added.
  See :ref:`General-custom_aggregation`.
* An example of reprojecting data from 2D auxiliary spatial coordinates
  (such as that from the ORCA grid) has been added. See :ref:`General-orca_projection`.
* A clarification of the behaviour of :func:`iris.analysis.calculus.differentiate`.
* A new :doc:`"whitepapers" </whitepapers/index>` section has been added to the documentation along
  with the addition of a paper providing an :doc:`overview of the load process for UM-like
  fileformats (e.g. PP and Fieldsfile) </whitepapers/um_files_loading>`.

