docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.8.rst, before:

What's new in Iris 1.8
**********************

:Release: 1.8.0
:Date: ???

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.8.
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

Iris 1.8 features
=================

.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Showcase: Rotate winds

    Iris can now rotate and unrotate wind vector data by transforming the wind
    vector data to another coordinate system.

    For example::

        >>> from iris.analysis.cartography import rotate_winds
        >>> u_cube = iris.load_cube('my_rotated_u_wind_cube.pp')
        >>> v_cube = iris.load_cube('my_rotated_v_wind_cube.pp')
        >>> target_cs = iris.coord_systems.GeogCS(6371229.0)
        >>> u_prime, v_prime = rotate_winds(u_cube, v_cube, target_cs)

.. admonition:: Showcase: Nearest-neighbour scheme

    A nearest-neighbour scheme for interpolation and regridding has been added
    to Iris. This joins the existing :class:`~iris.analysis.Linear` and
    :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` interpolation and regridding schemes.

    For example::

        >>> result = cube.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Nearest())
        >>> regridded_cube = cube.regrid(target_grid, iris.analysis.Nearest())

.. admonition:: Showcase: Slices over a coordinate

    You can slice over one or more dimensions of a cube using :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices_over`.
    This provides similar functionality to :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices` but with
    almost the opposite outcome.
    
    Using :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices` to slice a cube on a selected dimension returns
    all possible slices of the cube with the selected dimension retaining its dimensionality.
    Using :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices_over` to slice a cube on a selected
    dimension returns all possible slices of the cube over the selected dimension. 
    
    To demonstrate this::

        >>> cube = iris.load(iris.sample_data_path('colpex.pp'))[0]
        >>> print cube.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (time: 6; model_level_number: 10; grid_latitude: 83; grid_longitude: 83)
        >>> my_slice = next(cube.slices('time'))
        >>> my_slice_over = next(cube.slices_over('time'))
        >>> print my_slice.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (time: 6)
        >>> print my_slice_over.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 10; grid_latitude: 83; grid_longitude: 83)
    

* :func:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate` now works with `biggus <http://biggus.readthedocs.org/>`_ arrays and so
  now supports concatenation of cubes with deferred data.
* Improvements to NetCDF saving through using biggus:
 * A cube's lazy data payload will still be lazy after saving; the data will not
   be loaded into memory by the save operation.
 * Cubes with data payloads larger than system memory can now be saved to NetCDF
   through biggus streaming the data to disk.
* :func:`iris.util.demote_dim_coord_to_aux_coord` and :func:`iris.util.promote_aux_coord_to_dim_coord`
  allow a coordinate to be easily demoted or promoted within a cube.
* :func:`iris.util.squeeze` removes all length 1 dimensions from a cube, and demotes
  any associated squeeze dimension :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` to be a scalar coordinate.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices_over`, which returns an iterator of all sub-cubes along a given
  coordinate or dimension index.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` now accepts datetime.datetime and 
  netcdftime.datetime instances for date or time coordinates.
* Many new and updated translations between CF spec and STASH codes or GRIB2 parameter
  codes.
* PP/FF loader creates a height coordinate at 1.5m or 10m for certain relevant stash codes.
* Lazy aggregator support for the :class:`standard deviation <iris.analysis.STD_DEV>`
  aggregator has been added.
* A speed improvement in calculation of :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights`.
* Experimental support for unstructured grids has been added with :func:`iris.experimental.ugrid`.
  This has been implemented using `UGRID <https://github.com/pyugrid/pyugrid>`_.
* :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.extract_overlapping` supports extraction of cubes over
  regions where common coordinates overlap, over multiple coordinates.
* Warnings raised due to invalid units in loaded data have been suppressed.
* Experimental low-level read and write access for FieldsFile variants is now supported
  via :class:`iris.experimental.um.FieldsFileVariant`.
* PP loader will return cubes for all fields prior to a field with a problematic
  header before raising an exception.
* NetCDF loader skips invalid global attributes, raising a warning rather than raising an
  exception.
* A warning is now raised rather than an exception when constructing an
  :class:`~iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory` fails.
* Supported :class:`aux coordinate factories <iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory>`
  have been extended to include:
 * ``ocean sigma coordinate``,
 * ``ocean s coordinate``,
 * ``ocean s coordinate, generic form 1``, and
 * ``ocean s coordinate, generic form 2``.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.intersection` now supports taking a points-only intersection.
  Any bounds on intersected coordinates are ignored but retained.
* The FF loader's known handled grids now includes ``Grid 21``.
* A :class:`nearest neighbour <iris.analysis.Nearest>` scheme is now provided for
  :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` and :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.regrid`. 
* :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.rotate_winds` supports transformation of wind vectors
  to a different coordinate system.
* NumPy universal functions can now be applied to cubes using
  :func:`iris.analysis.maths.apply_ufunc`.
* Generic functions can be applied to :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` instances using 
  :class:`iris.analysis.maths.IFunc`. 

Bugs fixed
==========
* Fix in netCDF loader to correctly determine whether the longitude coordinate
  (including scalar coordinates) is circular.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.intersection` now supports bounds that extend slightly beyond 360
  degrees.
* Lateral Boundary Condition (LBC) type FieldFiles are now handled correctly by the FF loader.
* Making a copy of a scalar cube with no data now correctly copies the data array.
* Height coordinates in NAME trajectory output files have been changed to match other
  NAME output file formats.
* Fixed datatype when loading an ``integer_constants`` array from a FieldsFile.
* FF/PP loader adds appropriate cell methods for ``lbtim.ib = 3`` intervals.
* An exception is raised if the units of the latitude and longitude coordinates
  of the cube passed into :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights` are not
  convertible to radians.
* GRIB1 loader now creates a time coordinate for a time range indicator of 2.
* NetCDF loader now loads units that are empty strings as dimensionless.

Deprecations
============
* The original GRIB loader has been deprecated and replaced with a new
  template-based GRIB loader.

Documentation Changes
=====================
* A chapter on :doc:`merge and concatenate </userguide/merge_and_concat>` has been
  added to the :doc:`user guide </userguide/index>`.
* A section on installing Iris using `conda <http://conda.pydata.org/>`_ has been
  added to the :doc:`install guide </installing>`.
* Updates to the chapter on
  :doc:`regridding and interpolation </userguide/interpolation_and_regridding>`
  have been added to the :doc:`user guide </userguide/index>`.

Commit message:

ENH: Deprecation of NetCDF default unlimited dims
Closes #1452

docs/iris/src/whatsnew/1.8.rst, after:

What's new in Iris 1.8
**********************

:Release: 1.8.0
:Date: ???

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 1.8.
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

Iris 1.8 features
=================

.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Showcase: Rotate winds

    Iris can now rotate and unrotate wind vector data by transforming the wind
    vector data to another coordinate system.

    For example::

        >>> from iris.analysis.cartography import rotate_winds
        >>> u_cube = iris.load_cube('my_rotated_u_wind_cube.pp')
        >>> v_cube = iris.load_cube('my_rotated_v_wind_cube.pp')
        >>> target_cs = iris.coord_systems.GeogCS(6371229.0)
        >>> u_prime, v_prime = rotate_winds(u_cube, v_cube, target_cs)

.. admonition:: Showcase: Nearest-neighbour scheme

    A nearest-neighbour scheme for interpolation and regridding has been added
    to Iris. This joins the existing :class:`~iris.analysis.Linear` and
    :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` interpolation and regridding schemes.

    For example::

        >>> result = cube.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Nearest())
        >>> regridded_cube = cube.regrid(target_grid, iris.analysis.Nearest())

.. admonition:: Showcase: Slices over a coordinate

    You can slice over one or more dimensions of a cube using :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices_over`.
    This provides similar functionality to :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices` but with
    almost the opposite outcome.
    
    Using :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices` to slice a cube on a selected dimension returns
    all possible slices of the cube with the selected dimension retaining its dimensionality.
    Using :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.slices_over` to slice a cube on a selected
    dimension returns all possible slices of the cube over the selected dimension. 
    
    To demonstrate this::

        >>> cube = iris.load(iris.sample_data_path('colpex.pp'))[0]
        >>> print cube.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (time: 6; model_level_number: 10; grid_latitude: 83; grid_longitude: 83)
        >>> my_slice = next(cube.slices('time'))
        >>> my_slice_over = next(cube.slices_over('time'))
        >>> print my_slice.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (time: 6)
        >>> print my_slice_over.summary(shorten=True)
        air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 10; grid_latitude: 83; grid_longitude: 83)
    

* :func:`iris.cube.CubeList.concatenate` now works with `biggus <http://biggus.readthedocs.org/>`_ arrays and so
  now supports concatenation of cubes with deferred data.
* Improvements to NetCDF saving through using biggus:
 * A cube's lazy data payload will still be lazy after saving; the data will not
   be loaded into memory by the save operation.
 * Cubes with data payloads larger than system memory can now be saved to NetCDF
   through biggus streaming the data to disk.
* :func:`iris.util.demote_dim_coord_to_aux_coord` and :func:`iris.util.promote_aux_coord_to_dim_coord`
  allow a coordinate to be easily demoted or promoted within a cube.
* :func:`iris.util.squeeze` removes all length 1 dimensions from a cube, and demotes
  any associated squeeze dimension :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` to be a scalar coordinate.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.slices_over`, which returns an iterator of all sub-cubes along a given
  coordinate or dimension index.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` now accepts datetime.datetime and 
  netcdftime.datetime instances for date or time coordinates.
* Many new and updated translations between CF spec and STASH codes or GRIB2 parameter
  codes.
* PP/FF loader creates a height coordinate at 1.5m or 10m for certain relevant stash codes.
* Lazy aggregator support for the :class:`standard deviation <iris.analysis.STD_DEV>`
  aggregator has been added.
* A speed improvement in calculation of :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights`.
* Experimental support for unstructured grids has been added with :func:`iris.experimental.ugrid`.
  This has been implemented using `UGRID <https://github.com/pyugrid/pyugrid>`_.
* :meth:`iris.cube.CubeList.extract_overlapping` supports extraction of cubes over
  regions where common coordinates overlap, over multiple coordinates.
* Warnings raised due to invalid units in loaded data have been suppressed.
* Experimental low-level read and write access for FieldsFile variants is now supported
  via :class:`iris.experimental.um.FieldsFileVariant`.
* PP loader will return cubes for all fields prior to a field with a problematic
  header before raising an exception.
* NetCDF loader skips invalid global attributes, raising a warning rather than raising an
  exception.
* A warning is now raised rather than an exception when constructing an
  :class:`~iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory` fails.
* Supported :class:`aux coordinate factories <iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory>`
  have been extended to include:
 * ``ocean sigma coordinate``,
 * ``ocean s coordinate``,
 * ``ocean s coordinate, generic form 1``, and
 * ``ocean s coordinate, generic form 2``.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.intersection` now supports taking a points-only intersection.
  Any bounds on intersected coordinates are ignored but retained.
* The FF loader's known handled grids now includes ``Grid 21``.
* A :class:`nearest neighbour <iris.analysis.Nearest>` scheme is now provided for
  :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` and :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.regrid`. 
* :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.rotate_winds` supports transformation of wind vectors
  to a different coordinate system.
* NumPy universal functions can now be applied to cubes using
  :func:`iris.analysis.maths.apply_ufunc`.
* Generic functions can be applied to :class:`~iris.cube.Cube` instances using 
  :class:`iris.analysis.maths.IFunc`. 

Bugs fixed
==========
* Fix in netCDF loader to correctly determine whether the longitude coordinate
  (including scalar coordinates) is circular.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.intersection` now supports bounds that extend slightly beyond 360
  degrees.
* Lateral Boundary Condition (LBC) type FieldFiles are now handled correctly by the FF loader.
* Making a copy of a scalar cube with no data now correctly copies the data array.
* Height coordinates in NAME trajectory output files have been changed to match other
  NAME output file formats.
* Fixed datatype when loading an ``integer_constants`` array from a FieldsFile.
* FF/PP loader adds appropriate cell methods for ``lbtim.ib = 3`` intervals.
* An exception is raised if the units of the latitude and longitude coordinates
  of the cube passed into :func:`iris.analysis.cartography.area_weights` are not
  convertible to radians.
* GRIB1 loader now creates a time coordinate for a time range indicator of 2.
* NetCDF loader now loads units that are empty strings as dimensionless.

Deprecations
============
* The original GRIB loader has been deprecated and replaced with a new
  template-based GRIB loader.
* Deprecated the NetCDF behaviour of assigning the outermost dimension to be unlimited.
  Switch to the new behaviour with no auto assignment by setting
  :data:`iris.FUTURE.netcdf_no_unlimited` to True.

Documentation Changes
=====================
* A chapter on :doc:`merge and concatenate </userguide/merge_and_concat>` has been
  added to the :doc:`user guide </userguide/index>`.
* A section on installing Iris using `conda <http://conda.pydata.org/>`_ has been
  added to the :doc:`install guide </installing>`.
* Updates to the chapter on
  :doc:`regridding and interpolation </userguide/interpolation_and_regridding>`
  have been added to the :doc:`user guide </userguide/index>`.
