What's New in Iris 2.3.0
************************

:Release: 2.3.0
:Date: 2019-12-19

This document explains the new/changed features of Iris in version 2.3.0
(:doc:`View all changes <index>`.)

Iris 2.3.0 Features
===================
.. _showcase:

.. admonition:: Support for CF 1.7

  We have introduced several changes that contribute to Iris's support for
  the CF Conventions, including some CF 1.7 additions. We are now able to
  support:

  * :ref:`Climatological Coordinates<climatological>`
  * :ref:`Standard name modifiers<standard_name>`
  * :ref:`Geostationary projection<geostationary>`

  You can read more about each of these below.

  Additionally, the conventions attribute, added by Iris when saving to
  NetCDF, has been updated to ``CF-1.7``, accordingly.

.. _climatological:
.. admonition:: Climatological Coordinate Support

  Iris can now load, store and save `NetCDF climatological coordinates
  <http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1
  .7/cf-conventions.html#climatological-statistics>`_. Any cube time
  coordinate can be marked as a climatological time axis using the boolean
  property: ``climatological``. The climatological bounds are stored in the
  coordinate's ``bounds`` property.

  When an Iris climatological coordinate is saved in NetCDF, the NetCDF
  coordinate variable will be given a 'climatology' attribute, and the
  contents of the
  coordinate's ``bounds`` property are written to a NetCDF boundary variable
  called '<coordinate-name>_bounds'.  These are in place of a standard
  'bounds' attribute and accompanying boundary variable. See below
  for an `example adapted from CF conventions <http://cfconventions
  .org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.7/cf-conventions
  .html#climatological-statistics>`_:

    .. code-block:: none

        dimensions:
          time=4;
          bnds=2;
        variables:
          float temperature(time,lat,lon);
            temperature:long_name="surface air temperature";
            temperature:cell_methods="time: minimum within years time: mean over years";
            temperature:units="K";
          double time(time);
            time:climatology="time_climatology";
            time:units="days since 1960-1-1";
          double time_climatology(time,bnds);
        data:  // time coordinates translated to date/time format
          time="1960-4-16", "1960-7-16", "1960-10-16", "1961-1-16" ;
          time_climatology="1960-3-1",  "1990-6-1",
                           "1960-6-1",  "1990-9-1",
                           "1960-9-1",  "1990-12-1",
                           "1960-12-1", "1991-3-1" ;

  If a climatological time axis is detected when loading NetCDF -
  indicated by the format described above - the ``climatological`` property
  of the Iris coordinate will be set to ``True``.

.. admonition:: New Chunking Strategy

  Iris now makes better choices of Dask chunk sizes when loading from NetCDF
  files: If a file variable has small, specified chunks, Iris will now choose
  Dask chunks which are a multiple of these up to a default target size.

  This is particularly relevant to files with an unlimited dimension, which
  previously could produce a large number of small chunks. This had an adverse
  effect on performance.

  In addition, Iris now takes its default chunksize from the default configured
  in Dask itself, i.e. ``dask.config.get('array.chunk-size')``.

.. admonition:: Lazy Statistics

  Several statistical operations can now be done lazily, taking advantage of the
  performance improvements offered by Dask:

  * :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by`
  * :class:`~iris.analysis.RMS` (more detail below)
  * :class:`~iris.analysis.MEAN`

----

.. _geostationary:
.. _standard_name:
.. _conventions_1.7:

* Cube data equality testing (and hence cube equality) now uses a more
  relaxed
  tolerance : This means that some cubes may now test 'equal' that previously
  did not.
  Previously, Iris compared cube data arrays using:
    ``abs(a - b) < 1.e-8``

  We now apply the default operation of :func:`numpy.allclose` instead,
  which is equivalent to:
    ``abs(a - b) < (1.e-8 + 1.e-5 * b)``

* Added support to render HTML for :class:`~iris.cube.CubeList` in Jupyter
  Notebooks and JupyterLab.
* Loading CellMeasures with integer values is now supported.
* New coordinate system: :class:`iris.coord_systems.Geostationary`,
  including load and save support, based on the `CF Geostationary projection
  definition <http://cfconventions
  .org/cf-conventions/cf-conventions.html#_geostationary_projection>`_.
* :class:`iris.coord_systems.VerticalPerspective` can now be saved to and
  loaded from NetCDF files.
* :class:`iris.experimental.regrid.PointInCell` moved to
  :class:`iris.analysis.PointInCell` to make this regridding scheme public
* Iris now supports standard name modifiers. See `Appendix C, Standard Name Modifiers <http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.7/cf-conventions.html#standard-name-modifiers>`_ for more information.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.remove_cell_measure` now also allows removal of a cell
  measure by its name (previously only accepted a CellMeasure object).
* The :data:`iris.analysis.RMS` aggregator now supports a lazy calculation.
  However, the "weights" keyword is not currently supported by this, so a
  *weighted* calculation will still return a realised result, *and* force
  realisation of the original cube data.
* Iris now supports NetCDF Climate and Forecast (CF) Metadata Conventions 1.7 (see `CF 1.7 Conventions Document <http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.7/cf-conventions.html>`_ for more information)
* Updated standard name support to
  `CF standard name table version 70, 2019-12-10 <http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-standard-names/70/build/cf-standard-name-table.html>`_
* Updated UM STASH translations to
  `metarelate/metOcean commit 448f2ef, 2019-11-29 <https://github.com/metarelate/metOcean/tree/448f2ef5e676edaaa27408b9f3ddbecbf05e3289>`_


Iris 2.3.0 Dependency Updates
=============================
* Iris now supports Proj4 up to version 5, but not yet 6 or beyond, pending
  `fixes to some cartopy tests <https://github
  .com/SciTools/cartopy/pull/1289#pullrequestreview-272774087>`_.
* Iris now requires Dask >= 1.2 to allow for improved coordinate equality
  checks.


Bugs Fixed
==========
* Cube equality of boolean data is now handled correctly.
* Fixed a bug where cell measures were incorrect after a cube
  :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.transpose` operation.  Previously, this resulted in
  cell-measures that were no longer correctly mapped to the cube dimensions.
* The :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord` disregarded masked points and bounds, as did the :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord`.
  Fix permits an :class:`~iris.coords.AuxCoord` to contain masked points/bounds, and a TypeError exception is now
  raised when attempting to create or set the points/bounds of a
  :class:`~iris.coords.DimCoord` with arrays with missing points.
* :class:`iris.coord_systems.VerticalPerspective` coordinate system now uses
  the `CF Vertical perspective definition <http://cfconventions
  .org/cf-conventions/cf-conventions.html#vertical-perspective>`_; had been
  erroneously using Geostationary.
* :class:`~iris.coords.CellMethod` will now only use valid `NetCDF name tokens <https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/docs/netcdf_data_set_components.html#object_name>`_ to reference the coordinates involved in the statistical operation.
* The following var_name properties will now only allow valid `NetCDF name
  tokens
  <https://www.unidata.ucar
  .edu/software/netcdf/docs/netcdf_data_set_components.html#object_name>`_ to
  reference the said NetCDF variable name. Note that names with a leading
  underscore are not permitted.
    - :attr:`iris.aux_factory.AuxCoordFactory.var_name`
    - :attr:`iris.coords.CellMeasure.var_name`
    - :attr:`iris.coords.Coord.var_name`
    - :attr:`iris.coords.AuxCoord.var_name`
    - :attr:`iris.cube.Cube.var_name`
* Rendering a cube in Jupyter will no longer crash for a cube with
  attributes containing ``\n``.
* NetCDF variables which reference themselves in their ``cell_measures``
  attribute can now be read.
* :func:`~iris.plot.quiver` now handles circular coordinates.
* The names of cubes loaded from abf/abl files have been corrected.
* Fixed a bug in UM file loading, where any landsea-mask-compressed fields
  (i.e. with LBPACK=x2x) would cause an error later, when realising the data.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.collapsed` now handles partial collapsing of
  multidimensional coordinates that have bounds.
* Fixed a bug in the :data:`~iris.analysis.PROPORTION` aggregator, where cube
  data in the form of a masked array with ``array.mask=False`` would cause an
  error, but possibly only later when the values are actually realised.
  ( Note: since netCDF4 version 1.4.0, this is now a common form for data
  loaded from netCDF files ).
* Fixed a bug where plotting a cube with a
  :class:`iris.coord_systems.LambertConformal` coordinate system would result
  in an error.  This would happen if the coordinate system was defined with one
  standard parallel, rather than two.
  In these cases, a call to
  :meth:`~iris.coord_systems.LambertConformal.as_cartopy_crs` would fail.
* :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.aggregated_by` now gives correct values in points and
  bounds when handling multidimensional coordinates.
* Fixed a bug in the :meth:`iris.cube.Cube.collapsed` operation, which caused
  the unexpected realization of any attached auxiliary coordinates that were
  *bounded*.  It now correctly produces a lazy result and does not realise
  the original attached AuxCoords.


Documentation Changes
=====================
* Adopted a
  `new colour logo for Iris <../_static/Iris7_1_trim_full.png>`_
* Added a gallery example showing `how to concatenate NEMO ocean model data
  <../examples/Oceanography/load_nemo.html>`_.
* Added an example in the
  `Loading Iris Cubes: Constraining on Time <../userguide/loading_iris_cubes
  .html#constraining-on-time>`_
  Userguide section, demonstrating how to load data within a specified date
  range.
* Added notes to the :func:`iris.load` documentation, and the userguide
  `Loading Iris Cubes <../userguide/loading_iris_cubes.html>`_
  chapter, emphasizing that the *order* of the cubes returned by an iris load
  operation is effectively random and unstable, and should not be relied on.
* Fixed references in the documentation of
  :func:`iris.util.find_discontiguities` to a nonexistent
  "mask_discontiguities" routine : these now refer to
  :func:`~iris.util.mask_cube`.

