docs/iris/src/userguide/interpolation_and_regridding.rst, before:

.. _interpolation_and_regridding:


.. testsetup:: *

  import numpy as np
  import iris

=================================
Cube regridding and interpolation
=================================

Iris builds upon interpolation schemes implemented by scipy, and other packages,
to add powerful cube-aware regrid and interpolation functionality exposed through
simple cube methods.

.. _interpolation:

Interpolation
-------------

Interpolation can be achieved on a cube with the :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.interpolate`
method, with the first argument being the points to interpolate, and the second being
the interpolation scheme to use. The result is a new interpolated cube.

Sample points can be defined as an iterable of ``(coord/coord name, value(s))`` pairs
(e.g. ``[('latitude', 51.48), ('longitude', 0)]``).
Whilst more interpolation schemes will become available, the only interpolation scheme
currently implementing Iris' interpolate interface is :class:`iris.analysis.Linear`.

Taking the air temperature cube we've seen previously:

    >>> air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> print air_temp
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
         Dimension coordinates:
              latitude                           x              -
              longitude                          -              x
         Scalar coordinates:
              forecast_period: 6477 hours, bound=(-28083.0, 6477.0) hours
              forecast_reference_time: 1998-03-01 03:00:00
              pressure: 1000.0 hPa
              time: 1998-12-01 00:00:00, bound=(1994-12-01 00:00:00, 1998-12-01 00:00:00)
         Attributes:
              STASH: m01s16i203
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         Cell methods:
              mean: time

We can interpolate specific values from the coordinates of the cube:

    >>> sample_points = [('latitude', 51.48), ('longitude', 0)]
    >>> print air_temp.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    air_temperature / (K)               (scalar cube)
         Scalar coordinates:
              forecast_period: 6477 hours, bound=(-28083.0, 6477.0) hours
              forecast_reference_time: 1998-03-01 03:00:00
              latitude: 51.48 degrees
              longitude: 0 degrees
              pressure: 1000.0 hPa
              time: 1998-12-01 00:00:00, bound=(1994-12-01 00:00:00, 1998-12-01 00:00:00)
         Attributes:
              STASH: m01s16i203
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         Cell methods:
              mean: time

As we can see, the resulting cube is scalar and has longitude and latitude coordinates with
the values defined in our sample points.

It isn't necessary to specify sample points for each dimension - any dimensions which aren't
specified are preserved:

    >>> result = air_temp.interpolate([('longitude', 0)], iris.analysis.Linear())

    >>> print 'Original:', air_temp.summary(shorten=True)
    Original: air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
    >>> print 'Interpolated:', result.summary(shorten=True)
    Interpolated: air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73)

The sample points needn't be a scalar value and may be an array of values instead.
When multiple coordinates are provided with arrays instead of scalars, the coordinates
on the resulting cube will be orthogonal:

    >>> sample_points = [('longitude', np.linspace(-11, 2, 14)),
    ...                  ('latitude',  np.linspace(48, 60, 13))]
    >>> result = air_temp.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    >>> print result.summary(shorten=True)
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 13; longitude: 14)


Interpolating non horizontal coordinates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Interpolation in Iris is not limited to horizontal-spatial coordinates - any
coordinate satisfying the prerequisites of the chosen scheme may be interpolated
over.

For instance, the :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` scheme requires 1D numeric,
monotonic, coordinates. Supposing we have a single column cube such as
the one defined below:

    >>> column = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('hybrid_height.nc'))[:, 0, 0]
    >>> print column.summary(shorten=True)
    air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 15)

This cube has a "hybrid-height" vertical coordinate system, meaning that the vertical
coordinate is unevenly spaced in altitude:

    >>> print column.coord('altitude').points
    [  418.7    434.57   456.79   485.37   520.29   561.58   609.21   663.21
       723.58   790.31   863.41   942.88  1028.74  1120.98  1219.61]

We could regularise the vertical coordinate by defining 10 equally spaced altitude
sample points between 400 and 1250:

    >>> sample_points = [('altitude', np.linspace(400, 1250, 10))]
    >>> new_column = column.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    >>> print new_column.summary(shorten=True)
    air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 10)

To see what is going on, let's look at the original data, the interpolation line, and
the new data in a plot: 

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/interpolate_column.py

As we can see with the red diamonds on the extremes of the altitude values, we have
extrapolated data beyond the range of the original data. In some cases this is desirable
functionality, and for others it is not - for instance, this column defined
a surface altitude value of 414m, so extrapolating "air potential temperature" at 400m
in this case makes little physical sense.

Fortunately we can control the extrapolation mode when defining the interpolation scheme
with the ``extrapolation_mode`` keyword.  For :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` the
``extrapolation_mode`` must be one of ``linear``, ``error``, ``nan``, ``mask`` or
``nanmask``. To mask the values which lie beyond the range of the original data, using
the ``mask`` extrapolation mode is just a matter of constructing the appropriate scheme
and passing it through to the :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` method:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.Linear(extrapolation_mode='mask')
    >>> new_column = column.interpolate(sample_points, scheme)

The result will be a cube of the number of points passed through to interpolate, with the
values requiring extrapolation being masked.

.. _regridding:

Regridding
---------------------------------

Regridding conceptually is a very similar to interpolation in Iris, with the primary difference being
that interpolations are based on sample points, where regridding is based on the **spatial** grid of
*another cube*.

Regridding is achieved with the :meth:`cube.regrid() <iris.cube.Cube.regrid>` method,
with the first argument being *another cube* which has the grid to which the cube should
be interpolated onto, and the second argument being the regridding scheme to use.

The current regridding schemes available are :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` for a linear point
based regrid and :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` for area weighted regridding.

.. note::

    Regridding is a common operation needed to allow comparisons of data on different grids, however
    because of the powerful mapping functionality provided by cartopy, regridding is often not
    necessary if it is just for visualisation purposes.

Let's load two cubes which are on different grids:

    >>> global_air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> rotated_psl = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('rotated_pole.nc'))

We can visually confirm that they are on different grids by drawing a block plot
(pcolormesh) of the two cubes:

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridding_plot.py

To regrid the air temperature values onto the rotated pole grid using a linear
interpolation scheme, we pass the ``rotated_psl`` cube, whose grid will be used
as the locations for the interpolated air temperature values:

    >>> rotated_air_temp = global_air_temp.regrid(rotated_psl, iris.analysis.Linear())

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_rotated.py

Of course, we could have interpolated the pressure values onto the global grid, but
this will involve some form of extrapolation. As with interpolation, it is in the
definition of the scheme where the extrapolation mode can be controlled.

When regridding the pressure cube, which is defined on a limited area rotated pole grid, on to
the global grid as defined by the temperature cube, any linearly extrapolation
values would quickly become dominant and highly inaccurate. We may therefore define the
``extrapolation_mode`` in the constructor of :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` masking values which
lie outside of the domain of the rotated pole grid:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.Linear(extrapolation_mode='mask')
    >>> global_psl = rotated_psl.regrid(global_air_temp, scheme)

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_global.py

Notice that, although we can still see the approximate shape of the rotated pole grid, the
cells have now become rectangular in a plate-carrée/equirectangular projection, and that
the resulting cube is really global, with a large proportion of the data being masked.

Area weighted regridding
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To conserve quantities when regridding, it is often the case that a point-based
interpolation such as that provided by :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` is not
appropriate. The :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` scheme is less general than
:class:`iris.analysis.Linear`, but it is a conservative regridding scheme meaning
that the area weighted total is approximately preserved across grids.

With :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted`, each target grid-box's data is
computed as a weighted mean of all grid-boxes from the source grid. The weighting
for any given target grid-box is the area of the intersection with each of the
source grid-boxes. Such a scheme is an excellent choice when regridding from a high
resolution grid to a lower resolution, since all source data points will be accounted
for in the target grid.

Using the same global grid we saw previously, along with a limited area cube
containing total concentration of volcanic ash:

    >>> global_air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> print global_air_temp.summary(shorten=True)
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
    >>>
    >>> regional_ash = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('NAME_output.txt'))
    >>> regional_ash = regional_ash.collapsed('flight_level', iris.analysis.SUM)
    >>> print regional_ash.summary(shorten=True)
    VOLCANIC_ASH_AIR_CONCENTRATION / (g/m3) (latitude: 214; longitude: 584)

One of the key limitations to the AreaWeighted regridding scheme is that the two
input grids must be defined in the same coordinate system and both must contain
monotonic, bounded, 1D spatial coordinates.

.. note::

    The area weighted scheme requires spatial areas, therefore the longitude and
    latitude coordinates must be bounded. In this case, we can simply guess bounds
    based on the point values, but this step will is not necessary if the cube being
    worked with is already bounded:

        >>> global_air_temp.coord('longitude').guess_bounds()
        >>> global_air_temp.coord('latitude').guess_bounds()

Using numpy's masked array module we can mask any data which falls below a meaningful
concentration:

    >>> regional_ash.data = np.ma.masked_less(regional_ash.data, 5e-6)

Finally, we can regrid the data using the area weighted scheme:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.AreaWeighted(mdtol=0.5)
    >>> global_ash = regional_ash.regrid(global_air_temp, scheme)
    >>> print global_ash.summary(shorten=True)
    VOLCANIC_ASH_AIR_CONCENTRATION / (g/m3) (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)

Notice how the :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` scheme allows us to define ``mdtol``
which specifies the acceptable fraction of masked data in any given target grid-box.
If the fraction of masked data exceeds this value, the data in the target grid-box will
be masked in the result. The fraction of masked data is calculated based on the area of
masked source grid-boxes that overlaps with each target grid-box. Defining an
``mdtol`` allows fine control of masked data tolerance, but it is worth remembering that
defining anything other than an ``mdtol`` of 1 will prevent the scheme from being fully
conservative, as some data would be disregarded if it lies close to masked data.

To visualise the regrid, let's plot the original data, along with 3 distinct ``mdtol``
values to compare the result: 

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_global_area_weighted.py

Commit message:

Document the new datetime capability.

docs/iris/src/userguide/interpolation_and_regridding.rst, after:

.. _interpolation_and_regridding:


.. testsetup:: *

  import numpy as np
  import iris

=================================
Cube regridding and interpolation
=================================

Iris builds upon interpolation schemes implemented by scipy, and other packages,
to add powerful cube-aware regrid and interpolation functionality exposed through
simple cube methods.

.. _interpolation:

Interpolation
-------------

Interpolation can be achieved on a cube with the :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.interpolate`
method, with the first argument being the points to interpolate, and the second being
the interpolation scheme to use. The result is a new interpolated cube.

Sample points can be defined as an iterable of ``(coord/coord name, value(s))`` pairs, e.g. ``[('latitude', 51.48), ('longitude', 0)]``.
And the values for coordinates which correspond to date/times may optionally
be supplied as datetime.datetime or netcdftime.datetime instances,
e.g. ``[('time', datetime.datetime(2009, 11, 19, 10, 30))]``).
Whilst more interpolation schemes will become available, the only interpolation scheme
currently implementing Iris' interpolate interface is :class:`iris.analysis.Linear`.

Taking the air temperature cube we've seen previously:

    >>> air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> print air_temp
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
         Dimension coordinates:
              latitude                           x              -
              longitude                          -              x
         Scalar coordinates:
              forecast_period: 6477 hours, bound=(-28083.0, 6477.0) hours
              forecast_reference_time: 1998-03-01 03:00:00
              pressure: 1000.0 hPa
              time: 1998-12-01 00:00:00, bound=(1994-12-01 00:00:00, 1998-12-01 00:00:00)
         Attributes:
              STASH: m01s16i203
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         Cell methods:
              mean: time

We can interpolate specific values from the coordinates of the cube:

    >>> sample_points = [('latitude', 51.48), ('longitude', 0)]
    >>> print air_temp.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    air_temperature / (K)               (scalar cube)
         Scalar coordinates:
              forecast_period: 6477 hours, bound=(-28083.0, 6477.0) hours
              forecast_reference_time: 1998-03-01 03:00:00
              latitude: 51.48 degrees
              longitude: 0 degrees
              pressure: 1000.0 hPa
              time: 1998-12-01 00:00:00, bound=(1994-12-01 00:00:00, 1998-12-01 00:00:00)
         Attributes:
              STASH: m01s16i203
              source: Data from Met Office Unified Model
         Cell methods:
              mean: time

As we can see, the resulting cube is scalar and has longitude and latitude coordinates with
the values defined in our sample points.

It isn't necessary to specify sample points for each dimension - any dimensions which aren't
specified are preserved:

    >>> result = air_temp.interpolate([('longitude', 0)], iris.analysis.Linear())

    >>> print 'Original:', air_temp.summary(shorten=True)
    Original: air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
    >>> print 'Interpolated:', result.summary(shorten=True)
    Interpolated: air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73)

The sample points needn't be a scalar value and may be an array of values instead.
When multiple coordinates are provided with arrays instead of scalars, the coordinates
on the resulting cube will be orthogonal:

    >>> sample_points = [('longitude', np.linspace(-11, 2, 14)),
    ...                  ('latitude',  np.linspace(48, 60, 13))]
    >>> result = air_temp.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    >>> print result.summary(shorten=True)
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 13; longitude: 14)


Interpolating non horizontal coordinates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Interpolation in Iris is not limited to horizontal-spatial coordinates - any
coordinate satisfying the prerequisites of the chosen scheme may be interpolated
over.

For instance, the :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` scheme requires 1D numeric,
monotonic, coordinates. Supposing we have a single column cube such as
the one defined below:

    >>> column = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('hybrid_height.nc'))[:, 0, 0]
    >>> print column.summary(shorten=True)
    air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 15)

This cube has a "hybrid-height" vertical coordinate system, meaning that the vertical
coordinate is unevenly spaced in altitude:

    >>> print column.coord('altitude').points
    [  418.7    434.57   456.79   485.37   520.29   561.58   609.21   663.21
       723.58   790.31   863.41   942.88  1028.74  1120.98  1219.61]

We could regularise the vertical coordinate by defining 10 equally spaced altitude
sample points between 400 and 1250:

    >>> sample_points = [('altitude', np.linspace(400, 1250, 10))]
    >>> new_column = column.interpolate(sample_points, iris.analysis.Linear())
    >>> print new_column.summary(shorten=True)
    air_potential_temperature / (K)     (model_level_number: 10)

To see what is going on, let's look at the original data, the interpolation line, and
the new data in a plot: 

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/interpolate_column.py

As we can see with the red diamonds on the extremes of the altitude values, we have
extrapolated data beyond the range of the original data. In some cases this is desirable
functionality, and for others it is not - for instance, this column defined
a surface altitude value of 414m, so extrapolating "air potential temperature" at 400m
in this case makes little physical sense.

Fortunately we can control the extrapolation mode when defining the interpolation scheme
with the ``extrapolation_mode`` keyword.  For :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` the
``extrapolation_mode`` must be one of ``linear``, ``error``, ``nan``, ``mask`` or
``nanmask``. To mask the values which lie beyond the range of the original data, using
the ``mask`` extrapolation mode is just a matter of constructing the appropriate scheme
and passing it through to the :meth:`~iris.cube.Cube.interpolate` method:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.Linear(extrapolation_mode='mask')
    >>> new_column = column.interpolate(sample_points, scheme)

The result will be a cube of the number of points passed through to interpolate, with the
values requiring extrapolation being masked.

.. _regridding:

Regridding
---------------------------------

Regridding conceptually is a very similar to interpolation in Iris, with the primary difference being
that interpolations are based on sample points, where regridding is based on the **spatial** grid of
*another cube*.

Regridding is achieved with the :meth:`cube.regrid() <iris.cube.Cube.regrid>` method,
with the first argument being *another cube* which has the grid to which the cube should
be interpolated onto, and the second argument being the regridding scheme to use.

The current regridding schemes available are :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` for a linear point
based regrid and :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` for area weighted regridding.

.. note::

    Regridding is a common operation needed to allow comparisons of data on different grids, however
    because of the powerful mapping functionality provided by cartopy, regridding is often not
    necessary if it is just for visualisation purposes.

Let's load two cubes which are on different grids:

    >>> global_air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> rotated_psl = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('rotated_pole.nc'))

We can visually confirm that they are on different grids by drawing a block plot
(pcolormesh) of the two cubes:

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridding_plot.py

To regrid the air temperature values onto the rotated pole grid using a linear
interpolation scheme, we pass the ``rotated_psl`` cube, whose grid will be used
as the locations for the interpolated air temperature values:

    >>> rotated_air_temp = global_air_temp.regrid(rotated_psl, iris.analysis.Linear())

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_rotated.py

Of course, we could have interpolated the pressure values onto the global grid, but
this will involve some form of extrapolation. As with interpolation, it is in the
definition of the scheme where the extrapolation mode can be controlled.

When regridding the pressure cube, which is defined on a limited area rotated pole grid, on to
the global grid as defined by the temperature cube, any linearly extrapolation
values would quickly become dominant and highly inaccurate. We may therefore define the
``extrapolation_mode`` in the constructor of :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` masking values which
lie outside of the domain of the rotated pole grid:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.Linear(extrapolation_mode='mask')
    >>> global_psl = rotated_psl.regrid(global_air_temp, scheme)

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_global.py

Notice that, although we can still see the approximate shape of the rotated pole grid, the
cells have now become rectangular in a plate-carrée/equirectangular projection, and that
the resulting cube is really global, with a large proportion of the data being masked.

Area weighted regridding
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To conserve quantities when regridding, it is often the case that a point-based
interpolation such as that provided by :class:`iris.analysis.Linear` is not
appropriate. The :class:`iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` scheme is less general than
:class:`iris.analysis.Linear`, but it is a conservative regridding scheme meaning
that the area weighted total is approximately preserved across grids.

With :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted`, each target grid-box's data is
computed as a weighted mean of all grid-boxes from the source grid. The weighting
for any given target grid-box is the area of the intersection with each of the
source grid-boxes. Such a scheme is an excellent choice when regridding from a high
resolution grid to a lower resolution, since all source data points will be accounted
for in the target grid.

Using the same global grid we saw previously, along with a limited area cube
containing total concentration of volcanic ash:

    >>> global_air_temp = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('air_temp.pp'))
    >>> print global_air_temp.summary(shorten=True)
    air_temperature / (K)               (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)
    >>>
    >>> regional_ash = iris.load_cube(iris.sample_data_path('NAME_output.txt'))
    >>> regional_ash = regional_ash.collapsed('flight_level', iris.analysis.SUM)
    >>> print regional_ash.summary(shorten=True)
    VOLCANIC_ASH_AIR_CONCENTRATION / (g/m3) (latitude: 214; longitude: 584)

One of the key limitations to the AreaWeighted regridding scheme is that the two
input grids must be defined in the same coordinate system and both must contain
monotonic, bounded, 1D spatial coordinates.

.. note::

    The area weighted scheme requires spatial areas, therefore the longitude and
    latitude coordinates must be bounded. In this case, we can simply guess bounds
    based on the point values, but this step will is not necessary if the cube being
    worked with is already bounded:

        >>> global_air_temp.coord('longitude').guess_bounds()
        >>> global_air_temp.coord('latitude').guess_bounds()

Using numpy's masked array module we can mask any data which falls below a meaningful
concentration:

    >>> regional_ash.data = np.ma.masked_less(regional_ash.data, 5e-6)

Finally, we can regrid the data using the area weighted scheme:

    >>> scheme = iris.analysis.AreaWeighted(mdtol=0.5)
    >>> global_ash = regional_ash.regrid(global_air_temp, scheme)
    >>> print global_ash.summary(shorten=True)
    VOLCANIC_ASH_AIR_CONCENTRATION / (g/m3) (latitude: 73; longitude: 96)

Notice how the :class:`~iris.analysis.AreaWeighted` scheme allows us to define ``mdtol``
which specifies the acceptable fraction of masked data in any given target grid-box.
If the fraction of masked data exceeds this value, the data in the target grid-box will
be masked in the result. The fraction of masked data is calculated based on the area of
masked source grid-boxes that overlaps with each target grid-box. Defining an
``mdtol`` allows fine control of masked data tolerance, but it is worth remembering that
defining anything other than an ``mdtol`` of 1 will prevent the scheme from being fully
conservative, as some data would be disregarded if it lies close to masked data.

To visualise the regrid, let's plot the original data, along with 3 distinct ``mdtol``
values to compare the result: 

.. plot:: userguide/regridding_plots/regridded_to_global_area_weighted.py
